Source PDF: C:\Users\10\Desktop\ggs_vs\.txt_file_textbook\Macroeconfull_pdfs.pdf
Conversion Date: 2025-09-24T06:03:22.249643
OCR Enabled: True
================================================================================


=== PAGE 1 ===
201
The Facts of 
Growth
O
ur perceptions of how the economy is doing are often dominated by year-
to-year fluctuations in economic activity. A recession leads to gloom, and an 
expansion to optimism. But if we step back to get a look at activity over longer 
periods—say, over many decades—the picture changes. Fluctuations fade. 
Growth, which is the steady increase in aggregate output over time, dominates the picture.
Figure 10-1 shows the evolution of US GDP (panel (a)) and of US GDP per person 
(panel (b)) (both in 2012 dollars) since 1890. (The scale used to measure GDP or GDP per 
person on the vertical axis is called a logarithmic scale. The defining characteristic of a 
logarithmic scale is that the same proportional increase in a variable is represented by the 
same distance on the vertical axis.)
The vertical bars from 1929 to 1933 correspond to the large decrease in output dur-
ing the Great Depression: the other sets of bars correspond to the 1980–1982 recession, 
which is the largest postwar recession before the financial crisis and the Great Recession of 
2008–2010. Note how small these three episodes appear compared to the steady increase in 
output per person over the last 130 years. The cartoon on p203 makes the same point about 
growth and fluctuations, in an even more obvious way.
With this in mind, we now shift our focus from fluctuations to growth. Put another way, 
we turn from the study of the determination of output in the short and medium run—where 
fluctuations dominate—to the determination of output in the long run—where growth domi-
nates. Our goal is to understand what determines growth, why some countries are growing 
while others are not, and why some countries are rich while many others are still poor.
Section 10-1 discusses a central measurement issue; namely, how to measure the stan-
dard of living.
Section 10-2 looks at growth in the United States and other rich countries over the last 
50 years.
Section 10-3 takes a broader look, across both time and space.
Section 10-4 gives a primer on growth and introduces the framework that will be devel-
oped in the next three chapters.
There is a famous quote 
from Robert Lucas, the 1995 
Nobel Prize winner: “Once 
one starts thinking about 
growth, it is hard to think 
about anything else.”
b
For more on log scales, see 
Appendix 2 at the end of the 
book.
b
10
If you remember one basic message from this chapter, it should be: Over long peri-
ods of time, growth dwarfs fluctuations. The (complex) key to sustained growth is 
technological progress. 


=== PAGE 2 ===
202 
The Long Run 
The Core
10-1 MEASURING THE STANDARD  
OF LIVING
The fundamental reason we care about the growth of a country is that we care about 
the average standard of living in the country. Looking across time, we want to know 
by how much the standard of living has increased. Looking across countries, we want to 
know how much higher the standard of living is in one country relative to another. Thus, 
the variable we want to focus on, and compare either over time or across countries, is 
output per person, rather than output itself.
A practical problem then arises: How do we compare output per person across coun-
tries? Countries use different currencies; thus, output in each country is expressed in terms 
of its own currency. A natural solution is to use exchange rates. When comparing, say, the 
We care about other 
 dimensions of growth as 
well, in  particular whether the 
increase in the standard of 
 living benefits some more than 
others, whether growth comes 
with more or less inequality. 
More on this in Chapter 13.
c
Output per person is also 
called output per capita 
 (capita means “head” in 
Latin). And given that output 
and income are always equal, 
it is also called income per 
person or income per capita.
c
Real Output (billions of 2012 dollars)
(a)
Real Output per Person (2012 dollars)
(b)
300.0
600.0
1200.0
2400.0
4800.0
9600.0
19200.0
1890
1896
1902
1908
1914
1920
1926
1932
1938
1944
1950
1956
1962
1968
1974
1980
1986
1992
1998
2004
2010
2016
1890
1896
1902
1908
1914
1920
1926
1932
1938
1944
1950
1956
1962
1968
1974
1980
1986
1992
1998
2004
2010
2016
4000
8000
160000
32000
64000
Figure 10-1
US GDP since 1890 and 
US GDP per Person since 
1890
Panel (a) shows the enor-
mous increase in US output 
since 1890, by a factor of 51. 
Panel (b) shows that the 
increase in output is not 
simply the result of the large 
increase in US population 
from 63 million to more than 
320 million over this period. 
Output per person has risen 
by a factor of 10.
Sources: 1890–1947: Historical 
Statistics of the United States. 
http://hsus.cambridge.org/
HSUSWeb/toc/hsusHome.do. 
1948–2014: National Income and 
Product Accounts. Population 
estimates 1890–2014: Louis 
Johnston and Samuel H. 
Williamson, “What Was the US 
GDP Then?” Measuring Worth, 
2015, www.measuringworth.
com/datasets/usgdp/. More 
recent data: FRED: GDPC1, 
B230RC0Q173SBEA.


=== PAGE 3 ===
 
Chapter 10 
The Facts of Growth 
203
output per person of India to the output per person of the United States, we can compute 
Indian GDP per person in rupees, use the exchange rate to get Indian GDP per person in 
dollars, and compare it to the US GDP per person in dollars. This simple approach will not 
do, however, for two reasons.
 
■
First, exchange rates can vary a lot (more on this in Chapters 17 to 20). For example, 
the dollar increased and then decreased in the 1980s by roughly 50% vis-à-vis the 
currencies of the trading partners of the United States. But the standard of living in 
the United States did not increase by 50% and then decrease by 50% compared to the 
standard of living of its trading partners during the decade. Yet this is the conclusion 
we would reach if we were to compare GDP per person using exchange rates.
 
■
The second reason goes beyond fluctuations in exchange rates. In 2018, GDP per 
person in India, using the current exchange rate, was $2,016 compared to $62,517 
in the United States. Surely no one could live on $2,016 a year in the United States. 
But people live on it—admittedly, not very well—in India, where the prices of basic 
goods (those needed for subsistence) are much lower than in the United States. The 
level of income of the average person in India, who consumes mostly basic goods, is 
certainly not 31 times smaller than that of the average person in the United States. 
This point applies to other countries as well. In general, the lower a country’s output 
per person, the lower the prices of food and basic services in that country.
So, when we focus on comparing standards of living, we get more meaningful com-
parisons by correcting for these two effects—variations in exchange rates and systematic 
differences in prices across countries. The details of construction are complicated, but 
the principle is simple. The numbers for GDP—and hence for GDP per person—are con-
structed using a common set of prices for all countries. Such adjusted real GDP numbers, 
which you can think of as measures of purchasing power across time or across coun-
tries, are called purchasing power parity (PPP) numbers. Further discussion is given 
in the Focus Box “The Construction of PPP Numbers.”
When one is comparing rich versus poor countries, the differences between PPP 
numbers and the numbers based on current exchange rates can be large. Return to the 
Recall a similar discussion in 
Chapter 1 where we looked 
at output per person in 
China.
b
Dana Fradon / The New Yorker Collection/The Cartoon Bank


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 3 ===
“It’s true, Caesar. Rome is declining, but I expect it
to pick up in the next quarter.”

Dana Fradon / The New Yorker Collection/The Cartoon Bank

output per person of India to the output per person of the United States, we can compute
Indian GDP per person in rupees, use the exchange rate to get Indian GDP per person in
dollars, and compare it to the US GDP per person in dollars. This simple approach will not
do, however, for two reasons.

First, exchange rates can vary a lot (more on this in Chapters 17 to 20). For example,
the dollar increased and then decreased in the 1980s by roughly 50% vis-a-vis the
currencies of the trading partners of the United States. But the standard of living in
the United States did not increase by 50% and then decrease by 50% compared to the
standard of living of its trading partners during the decade. Yet this is the conclusion
we would reach if we were to compare GDP per person using exchange rates.

The second reason goes beyond fluctuations in exchange rates. In 2018, GDP per
person in India, using the current exchange rate, was $2,016 compared to $62,517
in the United States. Surely no one could live on $2,016 a year in the United States.
But people live on it—admittedly, not very well—in India, where the prices of basic
goods (those needed for subsistence) are much lower than in the United States. The
level of income of the average person in India, who consumes mostly basic goods, is
certainly not 31 times smaller than that of the average person in the United States.

Recall a similar discussion in
Chapter 1 where we looked

This point applies to other countries as well. In general, the lower a country’s output < at output per person in

per person, the lower the prices of food and basic services in that country.

So, when we focus on comparing standards of living, we get more meaningful com-

parisons by correcting for these two effects—variations in exchange rates and systematic
differences in prices across countries. The details of construction are complicated, but
the principle is simple. The numbers for GDP—and hence for GDP per person—are con-
structed using a common set of prices for all countries. Such adjusted real GDP numbers,
which you can think of as measures of purchasing power across time or across coun-
tries, are called purchasing power parity (PPP) numbers. Further discussion is given
in the Focus Box “The Construction of PPP Numbers.”

When one is comparing rich versus poor countries, the differences between PPP

numbers and the numbers based on current exchange rates can be large. Return to the

Chapter 10 The Facts of Growth

China.

203


=== PAGE 4 ===
204 
The Long Run 
The Core
comparison between India and the United States. We saw that, at current exchange rates, 
the ratio of GDP per person in the United States to GDP per person in India was 31.3. Using 
PPP numbers, the ratio is “only” 8. Although this is still a large difference, it is much smaller 
than the ratio we obtained using current exchange rates. Differences between PPP numbers 
and numbers based on current exchange rates are typically smaller when making compari-
sons among rich countries. For example, using current exchange rates, the ratio of GDP 
per person in the United States to GDP per person in Germany in 2018 was 128%; based 
instead on PPP numbers, the ratio was 118%. (More generally, PPP numbers suggest that 
the United States still has the highest GDP per person among the world’s major countries.)
Let me end this section with three remarks before we move on and look at growth.
 
■
What matters for people’s welfare is their consumption rather than their income. 
One might therefore want to use consumption per person rather than output per per-
son as a measure of the standard of living. (This is indeed what we do in the Focus 
Box “The Construction of PPP Numbers.”) Because the ratio of consumption to 
The bottom line: When com-
paring standards of living 
across countries, make sure 
to use PPP numbers. c
Among advanced 
 economies, only Ireland and 
Switzerland have a higher 
PPP GDP per capita than the 
United States (see the WEO 
database). Other countries 
with higher PPP GDP include 
Kuwait and Qatar. Can you 
guess why?
c
The Construction of PPP Numbers
Consider two countries—let’s call them the United States and 
Russia, although we are not attempting to fit the characteris-
tics of those two countries very closely.
Assume that, in the United States, annual consumption 
per person equals $20,000 and that people each buy two 
goods every year: they buy a new car for $10,000 and spend 
the rest on food. The price of a yearly bundle of food in the 
United States is $10,000.
Assume that, in Russia, annual consumption per per-
son equals 120,000 rubles and people keep their cars for 
15 years. The price of a car is 600,000 rubles, so individu-
als spend on average 40,000 rubles—600,000 divided by 
15—a year on cars. They buy the same yearly bundle of food 
as their US counterparts, at a price of 80,000 rubles.
Russian and US cars are of identical quality, and so are 
Russian and US food. (You may dispute the realism of these 
assumptions. Whether a car in country X is the same as a car 
in country Y is the type of problem economists face when con-
structing PPP measures.) The exchange rate is such that one 
dollar is equal to 60 rubles. What is consumption per person 
in Russia relative to consumption per person in the United 
States?
One way to answer this question is by taking consump-
tion per person in Russia and converting it into dollars using 
the exchange rate. Using this method, Russian consumption 
per person in dollars is $2,000 (120,000 rubles divided by 
the exchange rate, 60 rubles to the dollar). According to 
these numbers, consumption per person in Russia is only 
10% of US consumption per person.
Does this answer make sense? It is true that Russians are 
poorer, but food is much cheaper in Russia. A US consumer 
spending all of  his $20,000 on food would buy 2 bundles 
of  food ($20,000/$10,000). A Russian consumer spending 
all of  his 120,000 rubles on food would buy 1.5 bundles 
of  food (120,000 rubles/80,000 rubles). In terms of  food 
bundles, the difference between US and Russian consump-
tion per person looks much smaller. And given that one-
half  of  consumption in the United States and two-thirds of 
consumption in Russia go to spending on food, this seems 
like a relevant computation.
Can we improve on our initial answer? Yes. One way is to 
use the same set of prices for both countries and then mea-
sure the quantities of each good consumed in each country 
using this common set of prices. Suppose we use US prices. 
In terms of US prices, annual consumption per person in 
the United States is obviously still $20,000. What is it in 
Russia? Every year, the average Russian buys approximately 
0.07 car (one car every fifteen years) and one bundle of 
food. Using US prices—$10,000 for a car and $10,000 for 
a bundle of food—gives Russian consumption per person 
as 
3(0.07 * $10,000) + (1 * $10,000)4 = 3$700 +  
$10,0004 = $10,700. So, using US prices to compute 
 consumption in both countries puts annual Russian con-
sumption per person at $10,700>$20,000 = 53.5% of 
annual US consumption per person, a better estimate of 
relative standards of living than we obtained using our first 
method (which put the number at only 10%).
This type of computation, namely the construction of vari-
ables across countries using a common set of prices, underlies 
PPP estimates. Rather than using US dollar prices as in our 
example (why use US rather than Russian or, for that mat-
ter, French prices?), these estimates use average prices across 
countries. These average prices are called international dol-
lar prices. Many of the estimates we use in this chapter are 
the result of an ambitious project known as the Penn World 
Tables. (Penn stands for the University of Pennsylvania, where 
the project was initially located.) Led by three economists—
Irving Kravis, Robert Summers, and Alan Heston—over more 
than 40 years, researchers working on the project have con-
structed PPP series not only for consumption (as we just did 
in our example), but more generally for GDP and its compo-
nents, going back to 1950, for most countries in the world. 
See Robert C. Feenstra, Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P. Timmer, 
“The Next Generation of the Penn World Table,” American 
Economic Review, 2015, 105(10): pp. 3150–3182. The PPP 
data are available for download at www.ggdc.net/pwt
FOCUS


=== PAGE 5 ===
 
Chapter 10 
The Facts of Growth 
205
output is rather similar across countries, the ranking of countries is roughly the 
same, whether we use consumption per person or output per person.
 
■
Thinking about the production side, we may be interested in differences in productivity 
rather than differences in the standard of living across countries. In this case, the right 
measure is output per worker—or, even better, output per hour worked if the informa-
tion about total hours worked is available—rather than output per person. Output per 
person and output per worker (or per hour) will differ to the extent that the ratio of the 
number of workers (or hours) to population differs across countries. Most of the differ-
ence we saw between output per person in the United States and in Germany comes, 
for example, from differences in hours worked per person (1,780 hours per year in the 
United States, compared to 1,360 hours per year in Germany, a difference largely due 
to a higher proportion of part-time employment in Germany) rather than from differ-
ences in productivity. Put another way, German workers are about as productive as 
their US counterparts, but they work fewer hours, so output per person is lower.
 
■
The reason we ultimately care about the standard of living is presumably that we 
care about happiness. We may therefore ask the obvious question: Does a higher 
standard of living lead to greater happiness? The answer is given in the Focus Box 
“Does Money Buy Happiness?” The answer: a qualified yes.
10-2 GROWTH IN RICH COUNTRIES  
SINCE 1950
Let’s start by looking, in this section, at growth in rich countries since 1950. In the next 
section, we shall look further back in time and across a wider range of countries.
Table 10-1 shows the evolution of output per person (GDP, measured at PPP prices, 
divided by population) for France, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States since 
1950. We have chosen these four countries not only because they are some of the world’s 
major economic powers, but also because what has happened to them is broadly represen-
tative of what has happened in other advanced countries over the last half-century or so.
Table 10-1 yields two main conclusions:
 
■
There has been a large increase in output per person.
 
■
There has been a convergence of output per person across countries.
Let’s look at each of these points in turn.
The average in the last line is a simple unweighted average.
Source: Penn World Table Version 8.1./Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar and Marcel P. Timmer (2015), “The Next 
Generation of the Penn World Table” forthcoming American Economic Review.
Table 10-1 
The Evolution of Output per Person in Four Rich Countries since 1950
Annual Growth Rate  
Output per Person (%)
Real Output per Person (2011 dollars)
1950–2017
 1950
2017
2017/1950
France
2.6
 7,025
39,461
 5.6
Japan
4.1
 2,531
40.374
15.9
United Kingdom
2.1
 9,354
39,128
 4.2
United States
2.0
14,569
54,995
 3.8
Average
2.7
 8,370
43,490
 5.2


=== PAGE 6 ===
206 
The Long Run 
The Core
Does money buy happiness? Or, put more accurately, does 
higher income per person lead to more happiness? The 
implicit assumption, when economists assess the perfor-
mance of an economy by looking at its level of income per 
person or at its growth rate, is that this is indeed the case. 
But early examinations of data on the relation between 
income and self-reported measures of happiness suggested 
that this assumption may not be right. They yielded what is 
now known as the Easterlin paradox (named for Richard 
Easterlin, one of the first economists to look systematically 
at the evidence):
 
■
Looking across countries, happiness in a country appeared 
to be higher the higher the average level of income per 
person. The relation, however, appeared to hold only in 
relatively poor countries. Looking at rich countries, say 
the OECD countries, there appeared to be little relation 
between average income per person and happiness.
 
■
Looking at individual countries over time, average hap-
piness in rich countries did not seem to increase much, 
if at all, with income. (There were no reliable data 
for poor countries.) In other words, in rich countries, 
higher income per person did not appear to increase 
happiness.
 
■
Looking across people within a given country, happi-
ness appeared to be strongly correlated with income. 
Rich people were consistently happier than poor people. 
This was true in both poor and rich countries.
The first two findings suggested that, once basic needs are 
satisfied, higher income per person did not increase happi-
ness. The third fact suggested that what is important was not 
the absolute level of income but the level of income relative 
to others.
If these findings were correct, it would have major impli-
cations for the way we think about the world and about eco-
nomic policies. In rich countries, policies aimed at increas-
ing income per person might be misdirected because what 
matters is the distribution of income rather than its average 
level. Globalization and the diffusion of information, to the 
extent that they make people in poor countries compare 
themselves not to rich people in the same country but to peo-
ple in richer countries, might actually decrease rather than 
increase happiness. So, as you can guess, these findings have 
led to an intense debate and further research. As new data 
have become available, better evidence has accumulated. 
The state of knowledge and the remaining controversies are 
analyzed in a recent article by Betsey Stevenson and Justin 
Wolfers. Their conclusions are well summarized in Figure 1.
The figure contains a lot of information. Let’s go through 
it step by step.
The horizontal axis measures PPP GDP per person for 
131 countries. The scale is a logarithmic scale, so a given size 
interval represents a given percentage increase in GDP per 
person. The vertical axis measures average life satisfaction in 
each country. The source for this variable is a 2006 Gallup 
FOCUS
Afghanistan  
Algeria  
Angola  
Argentina  
Armenia  
Bangladesh  
Belarus  
Benin  
Bolivia  
Botswana  
Brazil  
Bulgaria  
Burkina Faso  
Burundi  
Cambodia  
Cameroon  
Canada  
Chad  
Chile  
China  
Colombia  
Costa Rica  
Croatia  
Cuba  
Cyprus  
Czech Republic  
Denmark  
Egypt  
El Salvador  
Estonia  
Ethiopia  
Finland  
France  
Georgia  
Germany  
Ghana  
Greece  
Guatemala  
Haiti  
Honduras  
Hong Kong  
Hungary  
India  
Indonesia  
Iran  
Iraq  
Ireland  
Israel  
Italy  
Jamaica  
Japan  
Jordan  
Kazakhstan  
Kenya  
Korea 
Kuwait  
Kyrgyzstan  
Laos  
Latvia  
Lebanon  
Lithuania  
Macedonia  
Malawi  
Malaysia  
Mali  
Mexico  
Moldova  
Morocco  
Nepal  
New Zealand  
Nicaragua  
Niger  
Nigeria  
Norway
Pakistan  
Panama  
Peru  
Philippines  
Portugal  
Puerto Rico  
Romania  Russia  
Rwanda  
Saudi Arabia  
Singapore  
Slovak Republic  
Slovenia  
South Africa  
Spain  
Sri Lanka  
Switzerland 
Taiwan  
Tanzania  
Thailand  
Togo  
Turkey  
Uganda  
U.A.E. 
United Kingdom
U.S. 
Uruguay  
Venezuela  
Yemen  
Zambia  
Zimbabwe  
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
$500 
$1,000 
$2,000 
$4,000 
$8,000 
$16,000 
$32,000 
GDP per person (2006, at PPP prices), log scale 
Each dot represents
one country  
Higher-income and lower-
income people are equally
satisﬁed  
Higher-income
people are more
satisﬁed   
The line around the dot shows how
satisfaction relates to income within
that country:   
Average life satisfaction
(on a 10-point scale)  
Note: Not all nations are labeled.
Figure 1
Life Satisfaction and Income per Person
Source: Betsey Stevenson and Justin Wolfers, Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.Used with Permission.
Does Money Buy Happiness?


=== PAGE 7 ===
 
Chapter 10 
The Facts of Growth 
207
World Poll survey, which asked about a thousand individuals in each 
country the following question:
“Here is a ladder representing the ‘ladder of life.’ Let’s suppose the top of 
the ladder represents the best possible life for you; and the bottom, the 
worst possible life for you. On which step of the ladder do you feel you 
personally stand at the present time?”
The ladder went from 0 to 10. The variable measured on the verti-
cal axis is the average of the individual answers in each country.
Focus first on the dots representing each country, ignoring for the 
moment the lines that cross each dot. The visual impression is clear. 
There is a strong relation across countries between average income 
and average happiness. The index is around 4 in the poorest countries, 
around 8 in the richest. And, more importantly in view of the Easterlin 
paradox, this relation appears to hold for both poor and rich countries; 
if anything, life satisfaction appears to increase faster, as GDP per per-
son increases, in rich than in poor countries.
Focus now on the lines through each dot. The slope of each line 
reflects the estimated relation between life satisfaction and income 
within each country. Note first that all the lines slope upward. This 
confirms the third leg of the Easterlin paradox. In each country, rich 
people are happier than poor people. Note also that the slopes of most 
of these lines are roughly similar to the slope of the relation across 
countries. This goes against the Easterlin paradox. Individual happi-
ness increases with income, whether this is because the country is get-
ting richer or because the individual becomes relatively richer within 
the country.
Stevenson and Wolfers draw a strong conclusion from their find-
ings. Although individual happiness depends on much more than 
income, it definitely increases with income. While the idea that there is 
some critical level of income beyond which income no longer impacts 
well-being is intuitively appealing, it is at odds with the data. Thus, it 
is not a crime for economists to focus first on levels and growth rates of 
GDP per person.
So, is the debate over? The answer is no. Even if we accept this inter-
pretation of the evidence, clearly, many other aspects of the economy 
matter for welfare, income distribution surely being one of them. And 
not everyone is convinced by the evidence. In particular, the evidence 
on the relation between happiness and income per person over time 
within a country is not as clear as the evidence across countries or 
across individuals presented in Figure 1.
Given the importance of the question, the debate will continue. One 
aspect that has become clear, for example, from the work of Nobel Prize 
winners Angus Deaton and Daniel Kahneman is that, when thinking 
about “happiness,” it is important to distinguish between two ways in 
which a person may assess her or his well-being. The first one is emo-
tional well-being—the frequency and intensity of experiences such 
as joy, stress, sadness, anger, and affection that make one’s life pleas-
ant or unpleasant. Emotional well-being appears to rise with income 
because low income exacerbates the emotional pain associated with 
misfortunes such as divorce, ill health, and being alone. But only up to 
a threshold; there is no further progress beyond an annual income of 
about $75,000 (the experiment was run in 2009). The second is life 
satisfaction, a person’s assessment of her or his life when they think 
about it. Life satisfaction appears more closely correlated with income. 
Deaton and Kahneman conclude that high income buys life satisfac-
tion but not necessarily happiness. If measures of well-being are to be 
used to guide policy, their findings raise the question of whether life 
satisfaction or emotional well-being is better suited to these aims.1
The Large Increase in the Standard of Living since 1950
Look at the column on the far right of Table 1. Output per person has increased by a 
factor of 3.8 since 1950 in the United States, by a factor of 5.6 in France, and by a 
factor of 15.9 in Japan. These numbers show what is sometimes called the force of 
 compounding. In a different context, you probably have heard that saving even a little 
while you are young will build to a large amount by the time you retire. For example, if 
the interest rate is 4.1% a year, an investment of $1, with the proceeds reinvested every 
year, will grow to about $15.9 65 years later. The same logic applies to growth rates. The 
average annual growth rate per person in Japan over the period 1950 to 2017 (67 years) 
was equal to 4.1%. This high growth rate led to a 15.9-fold increase in real output per 
person in Japan over the period.
Clearly, a better understanding of growth, if it leads to the design of policies that 
stimulate growth, can have a large effect on the standard of living. Suppose we could find 
a policy measure that permanently increased the growth rate by 1% per year. This would 
lead, after 40 years, to a standard of living 48% higher than it would have been without 
the policy—a substantial difference.
Most of the increase in Japan 
took place before 1990. Since 
then, Japan has been in a 
prolonged economic slump, 
with much lower growth.
b
1.0140-1 = 1.48-1 = 48%
Unfortunately, policy mea-
sures with such magical 
results have proven difficult 
to discover!
b
1Sources: Betsey Stevenson and Justin Wolfers, “Economic Growth and Subjective Well-Being: Reassessing the Easterlin 
Paradox,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2008: pp. 1–87 and “Subjective Well-Being and Income: Is There 
Any Evidence of Satiation?” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 2013, 103(3): pp. 598–604; Daniel 
Kahneman and Angus Deaton, “High Income Improves Evaluation of Life But Not Emotional Well-Being,” Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 2010, 107(38): pp. 16,489–16,493. For a view closer to the Easterlin paradox and 
a fascinating discussion of policy implications, read Richard Layard, Happiness: Lessons from a New Science (2005, 
Penguin Books).


=== PAGE 8 ===
208 
The Long Run 
The Core
The Convergence of Output per Person
The second and third columns of Table 10-1 show that the levels of output per person 
have converged over time. The numbers for output per person are much closer in 2017 
than they were in 1950. Put another way, those countries that were behind have grown 
faster, reducing the gap between them and the United States.
In 1950, output per person in the United States was roughly twice the level of output 
per person in France and more than five times the level of output per person in Japan. 
From the perspective of people in Europe or Japan, the United States was the land of 
plenty, where everything was bigger and better.
Today these perceptions have faded, and the numbers explain why. Using PPP num-
bers, US output per person is still the highest, but in 2017 it was only 39% above aver-
age output per person in the other three countries, a much smaller difference than in 
the 1950s.
This convergence of levels of output per person across countries is not specific to 
these four countries. It extends to a set of OECD countries. This is shown in Figure 10-2, 
which plots the average annual growth rate of output per person since 1950 against the 
initial level of output per person in 1950 for the current OECD countries. There is a clear 
negative relation between the initial level of output per person and the growth rate since 
1950: Countries that were behind in 1950 have typically grown faster. The relation is 
not perfect. Turkey, which had roughly the same low level of output per person as Japan 
in 1950, has had a growth rate equal to only about one-half that of Japan. But the rela-
tion is clearly there.
Some economists have pointed to a problem in graphs like Figure 10-2. By looking 
at the subset of countries that are members of the OECD today, we are in effect looking at 
a club of economic winners. OECD membership is not officially based on economic suc-
cess, but economic success is an important determinant of membership. But when you 
look at a club whose membership is based on economic success, you will find that those 
who came from behind had the fastest growth. This is precisely why they made it into 
the club! So the finding of convergence could come in part from the way we selected the 
countries in the first place.
A better way of looking at convergence is to define the set of countries we look at not 
on the basis of where they are today—as we did in Figure 10-2 by taking today’s OECD 
members—but on the basis of where they were in, say, 1950. For example, we can look 
at all countries that had an output per person of at least one-fourth of US output per 
As a child in France in the 
1950s, I thought of the 
United States as the land of 
skyscrapers, big automo-
biles, and Hollywood movies.
c
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Iceland
Finland
France
Germany
Denmark
Iceland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Poland
Spain
Portugal
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
$0.00
$2,000.00
$4,000.00
$6,000.00
$8,000.00
$10,000.00
$12,000.00
$14,000.00
$16,000.00
Annual growth rate of GDP per person
1950–2017 (percent) 
GDP per person in 1950 (2005 dollars)
Figure 10-2
Growth Rate of GDP per 
Person since 1950 versus 
GDP per Person in 1950, 
OECD Countries
Countries with lower levels 
of output per person in 1950 
have typically grown faster.
Source: Penn World Tables 
Version 9. /Feenstra, Robert 
C., Robert Inklaar and Marcel 
P. Timmer (2015), “The Next 
Generation of the Penn World 
Table” American Economic 
Review, 105(10), 3150–3182, 
available for download at www.
ggdc.net/pwt.
The figure includes only the 
OECD members for which 
we have a reliable estimate of 
the level of output per person 
in 1950. c


=== PAGE 9 ===
 
Chapter 10 
The Facts of Growth 
209
person in 1950, and then look for convergence within that group. It turns out that most 
of the countries in that group have indeed converged, and therefore convergence is not 
solely an OECD phenomenon. However, a few countries—Uruguay, Venezuela among 
them—have not converged. In 1950, those two countries had roughly the same output 
per person as France. In 2017, they had fallen far behind; Uruguay’s output per person 
stood at one-third of the French level, Venezuela’s at one-fifth (and since then, although 
we do not have PPP-adjusted numbers, the evidence is that Venezuela’s output has col-
lapsed further).
10-3 A BROADER LOOK ACROSS TIME 
AND SPACE
In the previous section, we focused on growth since 1950 in rich countries. Let’s now put 
this in context by looking at the evidence over a much longer time span and a wider set 
of countries.
Looking across Two Millennia
Has output per person in the currently rich economies always grown at rates similar to 
the growth rates shown in Table 10-1? The answer is no. Estimates of growth are clearly 
harder to construct as we look further back in time. But there is agreement among eco-
nomic historians about the main evolutions over the last 2,000 years.
From the end of the Roman Empire in 476 to roughly 1500, there was essentially 
no growth of output per person in Europe. Most people worked in agriculture in which 
there was little technological progress. Because agriculture’s share of output was so 
large, inventions with applications outside agriculture could contribute little to overall 
production and output. Although there was some output growth, a roughly proportional 
increase in population led to roughly constant output per person.
This period of stagnation of output per person is often called the Malthusian era. 
Thomas Robert Malthus, an English economist at the end of the 18th century, argued 
that this proportional increase in output and population was not a coincidence. Any 
increase in output, he argued, would lead to a decrease in mortality, leading to an 
increase in population until output per person was back to its initial level. Europe was in 
a Malthusian trap, unable to increase its output per person.
Eventually, Europe was able to escape this trap. From about 1500 to 1700, growth of 
output per person turned positive, but it was still small—only around 0.1% per year. It then 
increased to just 0.2% per year from 1700 to 1820. Starting with the Industrial Revolution, 
growth rates increased, but from 1820 to 1950 the growth rate of output per person in the 
United States was still only 1.5% per year. On the scale of human history, therefore, sus-
tained growth of output per person—especially the high growth rates we have seen since 
1950—is definitely a recent phenomenon. The Focus Box “The Reality of Growth: A US 
Workingman’s Budget in 1851” gives a vivid sense of the progress over the last 150 years.
Looking across Countries
We have seen how output per person has converged among OECD countries. But what 
about the other countries? Are the poorest countries also growing faster? Are they con-
verging toward the United States, even if they are still far behind?
The answer is given in Figure 10-3, which plots the average annual growth rate of 
output per person since 1960 against output per person for the year 1960, for the 85 
countries for which we have data.
The numbers for 1950 are 
missing for too many coun-
tries to use 1950 as the initial 
year, as we did in Figure 10-2.
b


=== PAGE 10 ===
210 
The Long Run 
The Core
The Reality of Growth: A US Workingman’s Budget in 1851
Data on GDP per capita do not fully convey the reality of 
growth and the accompanying increase in the standard of 
living. An examination of a “workingman’s budget” in 1851 
Philadelphia gives a much better sense of the improvement.
FOCUS
Table 1 
 Annual Workingman’s Budget, Philadelphia, 1851, in current dollars
Note how much a worker spent on food, 41% of total expenditures. Today’s corresponding share—as reflected in 
the composition of the consumption basket used to compute the Consumer Price Index—is only 15.2%. And food 
at home—as opposed to food in restaurants—accounts for only 9.4% of total consumption today. But perhaps more 
revealing is the composition of food consumption. Compare the food in the table to the richness and diversity of the 
food we eat today.
Sources: William Baumol, Sue Ann Batey Blackman, and Edward N. Wolff, Productivity and American Leadership: The 
Long View (1989, MIT Press), Chapter 3, Table 3.2. The composition of expenditures today comes from Appendix 9, 
Chapter 6, in the BLS Handbook of Methods.
Item of expenditure
Amount ($)
(% of total)
Butcher’s meat (2 lb a day)
 72.80
13.5
Flour (6½ lb a year)
 32.50
6.0
Butter (2 lb a week)
 32.50
6.0
Potatoes (2 pk a week)
 26.00
4.8
Sugar (4 lb a week)
 16.64
3.0
Coffee and tea
 13.00
2.4
Milk
7.28
1.3
Salt, pepper, vinegar, starch, soap,  
yeast, cheese, eggs
 20.80
3.8
Total expenditures for food
221.52
41.1
Rent
156.00
28.9
Coal (3 tons a year)
 15.00
2.7
Charcoal, chips, matches
5.00
0.9
Candles and oil
 7.28
1.4
Household articles (wear, tear,  
and breakage)
 13.00
2.4
Bedclothes and bedding
10.40
1.9
Wearing apparel
104.00
19.3
Newspapers
6.24
1.1
Total expenditures other than food
316.92
58.9
The striking feature of Figure 10-3 is that there is no clear pattern. It is not the case 
that, in general, countries that were behind in 1960 have grown faster. Some have, but 
many have clearly not.
The cloud of points in Figure 10-3 hides, however, a number of interesting patterns 
that appear when we put countries into different groups, denoted by different symbols. 


=== PAGE 11 ===
 
Chapter 10 
The Facts of Growth 
211
The diamonds represent OECD countries, the squares African countries, and the trian-
gles Asian countries. Looking at patterns by groups yields three main conclusions.
1. The picture for the OECD countries (the rich countries) is much the same as in 
Figure  10-2, which looked at a slightly longer period (from 1950 onward, rather 
than from 1960). Nearly all start at high levels of output per person (say, at least 
one-third of the US level in 1960) and there is clear evidence of convergence.
2. Convergence is also visible for many Asian countries: Most of the countries with 
high growth rates over the period are in Asia. Japan was the first country to take off. 
A decade later, in the 1960s, four countries—Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and 
South Korea, a group of countries sometimes called the four tigers—started catch-
ing up as well. In 1960, their average output per person was about 15% of that of 
the United States; by 2017, the ratio had increased to 85%. More recently, the major 
story has been China—both because of its very high growth rates and because of its 
sheer size. Over the period 1960–2017 average growth of output per person per year 
in China has been 4.5%. But, because it started low, its output per person is still only 
about one-fourth of that of the United States.
3. The picture is different, however, for African countries. Most African countries 
(represented by squares) were very poor in 1960, and most have not done well over 
the period. Many have suffered from either internal or external conflicts. Four of 
them have had negative growth of output per person—an absolute decline in their 
standard of living between 1960 and 2017. For example, growth averaged—1.1% 
in the Central African Republic and, as a result, output per person in 2017 was 
only 52% of its level in 1960. Hope for Africa, however, comes from more recent 
numbers: Growth of output per person in sub-Saharan Africa has been close to 3% 
since 2000.
Looking further back in time, the following picture emerges. For much of the first 
millennium, and until the 15th century, China probably had the world’s highest level of 
output per person. For a couple of centuries, leadership then moved to the cities of north-
ern Italy. But until the 19th century, differences across countries were typically much 
Paradoxically, the two 
 fastest growing countries in 
Figure 10-3 are Botswana 
and Equatorial Guinea 
in Africa. In both cases, 
 however, high growth reflects 
primarily favorable natural 
resources—diamonds in 
Botswana and oil in Guinea.
b
22.0
21.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
Annual growth rate of GDP per person
1960–2017 (percent) 
$0
$5,000
$10,000
$15,000
$20,000
$25,000
GDP per person in 1960 (2005 dollars)
OECD
Africa
Asia
Figure 10-3
Growth Rate of GDP 
per Person since 1960, 
versus GDP per Person in 
1960, 85 Countries
There is no clear relation 
between the growth rate of 
output since 1960 and the 
level of output per person in 
1960.
Source: Penn World Tables 
Version 9. /Feenstra, Robert 
C., Robert Inklaar and Marcel 
P. Timmer (2015), “The Next 
Generation of the Penn World 
Table” American Economic 
Review, 105(10), 3150–3182, 
available for download at  
www.ggdc.net/pwt.


=== PAGE 12 ===
212 
The Long Run 
The Core
smaller than they are today. Starting in the 19th century, a number of countries, first in 
Western Europe then in North and South America, started growing faster than others. 
Since then, a number of other countries, most notably in Asia, have started growing fast 
and are converging. Many others, mainly in Africa, are not.
Our main focus, in this and the next chapter, will be on growth in rich and emerging 
countries. We shall not take on some of the wider challenges raised by the facts we have 
just seen, such as why growth of output per person started in earnest in the 19th century 
or why Africa has remained so poor. Doing so would take us too far into economic his-
tory and development economics. But these facts put in perspective the two basic facts 
we discussed when looking at the OECD: Neither growth nor convergence is a historical 
necessity.
10-4 THINKING ABOUT GROWTH: A 
PRIMER
To think about growth, economists use a framework developed by Robert Solow, of 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), in the late 1950s. The framework 
has proven sturdy and useful, and we will use it here. This section provides an intro-
duction; Chapters 11 and 12 will provide a more detailed analysis, first of the role of 
capital accumulation and then of the role of technological progress in the process of 
growth.
The Aggregate Production Function
The starting point for any theory of growth must be an aggregate production func-
tion, which is a specification of the relation between aggregate output and the inputs in 
production.
The aggregate production function we introduced in Chapter 7 to study the deter-
mination of output in the short run and the medium run took a particularly simple 
form. Output was simply proportional to the amount of labor used by firms; more spe-
cifically, proportional to the number of workers employed by firms (equation (7.2)). So 
long as our focus was on fluctuations in output and employment, the assumption was 
acceptable. But now that our focus has shifted to growth, this assumption will no longer 
do. It implies that output per worker is constant, ruling out growth of output per worker 
altogether. It is time to relax it. From now on, we will assume that there are two inputs—
capital and labor—and that the relation between aggregate output and the two inputs 
is given by:
 
Y = F(K, N) 
(10.1)
As before, Y is aggregate output. K is capital, the sum of all the machines, plants, and 
office buildings in the economy. N is labor, the number of workers in the economy. The 
function F, which tells us how much output is produced for given quantities of capital 
and labor, is the aggregate production function.
This way of thinking about aggregate production is an improvement on our treat-
ment in Chapter 7. But it is still a dramatic simplification of reality. Machines and office 
buildings play different roles in production and should be treated as separate inputs. 
Workers with doctorate degrees are different from high school dropouts; yet, by con-
structing the labor input as simply the number of workers in the economy, we treat 
all workers as identical. We will relax some of these simplifications later. For the time 
The distinction between 
growth theory and develop-
ment economics is fuzzy. A 
rough distinction: Growth 
theory takes many of the 
institutions of a country (e.g., 
its legal system and its form 
of government) as given. 
Development economics 
asks what institutions are 
needed to sustain steady 
growth, and how they can be 
put in place.
c
Solow was awarded the 
Nobel Prize in 1987 for his 
work on growth. c
The aggregate production 
function is Y = F(K, N). 
Aggregate output (Y) 
depends on the  aggregate 
capital stock (K) and 
 aggregate employment (N).
c


=== PAGE 13 ===
 
Chapter 10 
The Facts of Growth 
213
being, equation (10.1), which emphasizes the role of both labor and capital in produc-
tion, will do.
The next step must be to think about where the aggregate production function F, which 
relates output to the two inputs, comes from. In other words, what determines how much 
output can be produced for given quantities of capital and labor? The answer: the state of 
technology. A country with more advanced technology will produce more output from 
the same quantities of capital and labor than will an economy with primitive technology.
Returns to Scale and Returns to Factors
Now that we have introduced the aggregate production function, the next question is: 
What restrictions can we reasonably impose on this function?
Consider first a thought experiment in which we double both the number of workers 
and the amount of capital in the economy. What do you expect will happen to output? A rea-
sonable answer is that output will double as well. In effect, we have cloned the original econ-
omy, and the clone economy can produce output in the same way as the original economy. 
This property is called constant returns to scale. If the scale of operation is doubled—
that is, if the quantities of capital and labor are doubled—then output will also double.
F(2K, 2N) = 2Y
Or, more generally, for any number x (this will be useful later)
 
F(xK, xN) = xY 
(10.2)
We have just looked at what happens to production when both capital and labor are 
increased. Let’s now ask a different question. What should we expect to happen if only 
one of the two inputs in the economy—say, capital—is increased?
Output will increase. That part is clear. But the same increase in capital will lead to 
smaller and smaller increases in output. In other words, if there is little capital to start 
with, a little more capital will help a lot. If there is a lot of capital to start with, a little 
more capital may make little difference. Why? Think, for example, of a secretarial pool, 
composed of a given number of secretaries. Think of capital as computers. The introduc-
tion of the first computer will substantially increase the pool’s production because some 
of the more time-consuming tasks can now be done automatically by the computer. As 
the number of computers increases and more secretaries in the pool get their own com-
puters, production will further increase, although by less per additional computer than 
was the case when the first one was introduced. Once every secretary has a computer, 
increasing the number of computers further is unlikely to increase production much, if 
at all. Additional computers might simply remain unused and left in their shipping boxes 
and lead to no increase in output.
We shall refer to the property that increases in capital lead to smaller and smaller 
increases in output as decreasing returns to capital (a property that will be familiar to 
those who have taken a course in microeconomics).
A similar argument applies to the other input, labor. Increases in labor, given capital, 
lead to smaller and smaller increases in output. (Return to our example, and think of 
what happens as you increase the number of secretaries for a given number of comput-
ers.) There are decreasing returns to labor as well.
Output per Worker and Capital per Worker
The production function we have written, together with the assumption of constant 
returns to scale, implies that there is a simple relation between output per worker and capi-
tal per worker.
The function F depends on 
the state of technology. The 
higher the state of technol-
ogy, the higher F(K, N) for a 
given K and a given N.
b
Constant returns to scale: 
F(xK, xN) = xY.
b
I know, the example is a bit 
old-fashioned, but it is the 
most transparent example I 
could think of.
Output here is secretarial 
services. The two inputs are 
secretaries and comput-
ers. The production function 
relates secretarial services to 
the number of secretaries and 
the number of computers.
b
Even under constant returns 
to scale, there are decreas-
ing returns to each factor, 
keeping the other factor con-
stant. There are decreasing 
returns to capital. Given labor, 
increases in capital lead to 
smaller and smaller increases 
in output. There are decreas-
ing returns to labor. Given 
capital, increases in labor 
lead to smaller and smaller 
increases in output.
b


=== PAGE 14 ===
214 
The Long Run 
The Core
To see this, set x = 1>N in equation (10.2), so that
 
Y
N = Fa K
N
, N
N b = Fa K
N, 1b 
(10.3)
Y/N is output per worker, and K/N is capital per worker. So equation (10.3) tells us 
that the amount of output per worker depends on the amount of capital per worker. This 
relation between output per worker and capital per worker will play a central role in what 
follows, so let’s look at it more closely.
This relation is drawn in Figure 10-4. Output per worker (Y/N) is measured on 
the vertical axis, and capital per worker (K/N) is measured on the horizontal axis. The 
relation between the two is given by the upward-sloping curve. As capital per worker 
increases, so does output per worker. Note that the curve is drawn so that increases in 
capital lead to smaller and smaller increases in output. This follows from the property 
that there are decreasing returns to capital: At point A, where capital per worker is low, 
an increase in capital per worker, represented by the horizontal distance AB, leads to 
an increase in output per worker equal to the vertical distance A′B′. At point C, where 
capital per worker is larger, the same increase in capital per worker, represented by the 
horizontal distance CD (where the distance CD is equal to the distance AB), leads to a 
much smaller increase in output per worker, only the distance C′D′. This is just like our 
secretarial pool example, in which additional computers had less and less impact on 
total output.
The Sources of Growth
We are now ready to return to our basic question. Where does growth come from? Why 
does output per worker—or output per person, if we assume the ratio of workers to the 
population as a whole remains constant—go up over time? Equation (10.3) gives a first 
answer:
 
■
Increases in output per worker (Y/N) can come from increases in capital per worker 
(K/N). This is the relation we just looked at in Figure 10-4. As (K/N) increases—that 
is, as we move to the right on the horizontal axis—(Y/N) increases.
 
■
Or they can come from improvements in the state of technology that shift the pro-
duction function, F, and lead to more output per worker given capital per worker. 
Make sure you understand 
what is behind the algebra. 
Suppose that capital and 
the number of workers both 
double. What happens to 
output per worker?
c
Increases in capital per 
worker lead to smaller and 
smaller increases in output 
per worker as the level of 
capital per worker increases. c
Capital per worker, K/N
A
Output per worker, Y/N
Y/N 5 F (K/N, 1)
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
Figure 10-4
Output and Capital per 
Worker
Increases 
in 
capital 
per 
worker lead to smaller and 
smaller increases in output 
per worker.


=== PAGE 15 ===
 
Chapter 10 
The Facts of Growth 
215
Capital per worker, K/N
A
Output per worker, Y/N
F(K/N, 1)
F(K/N, 1)
A
B
Figure 10-5
The Effects of an 
Improvement in the State 
of Technology
An improvement in technol-
ogy shifts the production 
function up, leading to an 
increase in output per worker 
for a given level of capital per 
worker.
This is shown in Figure 10-5. An improvement in the state of technology shifts the 
production function up, from F(K>N, 1) to F(K>N, 1)′. For a given level of capital per 
worker, the improvement in technology leads to an increase in output per worker. 
For example, for the level of capital per worker corresponding to point A, output per 
worker increases from A′ to B′. (To go back to our secretarial pool example, a reallo-
cation of tasks within the pool may lead to a better division of labor and an increase 
in the output per secretary.)
Hence, we can think of growth as coming from capital accumulation and from 
technological progress—the improvement in the state of technology. We will see, 
however, that these two factors play different roles in the growth process.
 
■
Capital accumulation by itself cannot sustain growth. A formal argument will 
have to wait until Chapter 11. But you can already see the intuition behind this in 
Figure 10-5. Because of decreasing returns to capital, sustaining a steady increase 
in output per worker will require larger and larger increases in the level of capital 
per worker. At some stage, the economy will be unwilling or unable to save and 
invest enough to further increase capital. At that point, output per worker will stop 
growing.
Does this mean that an economy’s saving rate (the proportion of income that is 
saved) is irrelevant? No. It is true that a higher saving rate cannot permanently 
increase the growth rate of output. But a higher saving rate can sustain a higher level 
of output. Let me state this in a slightly different way. Take two economies that dif-
fer only in their saving rates. The two economies will eventually grow at the same 
rate, but at any point in time, the economy with the higher saving rate will have a 
higher level of output per person than the other. How this happens, how much the 
saving rate affects the level of output, and whether a country like the United States 
(which has a low saving rate) should try to increase its saving rate will be discussed 
in Chapter 11.
 
■
Sustained growth requires sustained technological progress. This really follows 
from the previous proposition. Given that the two factors that can lead to an 
increase in output are capital accumulation and technological progress, if capital 
accumulation cannot sustain growth forever, then technological progress must be 
the key to growth. And it is. We will see in Chapter 12 that an economy’s rate of 
growth of output per person is eventually determined by its rate of technological 
progress.
Increases in capital per 
worker: Movements along 
the production function.
Improvements in the state of 
technology: Shifts (up) of the 
production function.
b


=== PAGE 16 ===
This is important. It means that in the long run, an economy that sustains a 
higher rate of technological progress will eventually overtake all other economies. 
This, of course, raises the next question. What determines the rate of technological 
progress? One can think of the state of  technology as the list of blueprints defining 
both the range of products that can be produced in the economy and the techniques 
available to produce them. But, in fact, how efficiently things are produced depends 
not only on the list of blueprints but also on the way the economy is organized—
from the internal organization of firms, to the system of laws and the quality of 
their enforcement, to the political system, and so on. We shall review the evidence 
in Chapter 12.
SUMMARY
 
■Over long periods, fluctuations in output are dwarfed by 
growth, which is the steady increase of aggregate output 
over time.
 
■Looking at growth in four rich countries (France, Japan, the 
United Kingdom, and the United States) since 1950, two 
main facts emerge.
1. All four countries have experienced strong growth and 
a large increase in the standard of living. Growth from 
1950 to 2017 increased real output per person by a fac-
tor of 3.8 in the United States and by a factor of 15.9 in 
Japan.
2. The levels of output per person across the four countries 
have converged over time. Put another way, the coun-
tries that were behind have grown faster, reducing the 
gap between them and the current leader, the United 
States.
 
■Looking at the evidence across a broader set of countries 
and a longer period, the following facts emerge.
1. On the scale of human history, sustained output growth 
is a recent phenomenon.
2. The convergence of levels of output per person is not a 
worldwide phenomenon. Many Asian countries are rap-
idly catching up, while many African countries have both 
low levels of output per person and low growth rates.
 
■To think about growth, economists start from an aggregate 
production function relating aggregate output to two factors 
of production: capital and labor. How much output is pro-
duced given these inputs depends on the state of technology.
 
■Under the assumption of constant returns, the aggregate 
production function implies that increases in output per 
worker can come either from increases in capital per worker 
or from improvements in the state of technology.
 
■Capital accumulation by itself cannot permanently sus-
tain growth of output per person. Nevertheless, how much 
a country saves is important because the saving rate deter-
mines the level of output per person, if not its growth rate.
 
■Sustained growth of output per person is ultimately due to 
technological progress. Perhaps the most important ques-
tion in growth theory is what the determinants of techno-
logical progress are.
KEY TERMS
growth, 201
logarithmic scale, 201
standard of living, 202
output per person, 202
purchasing power, 203
purchasing power parity (PPP), 203
Easterlin paradox, 206
force of compounding, 207
convergence, 208
Malthusian trap, 209
four tigers, 211
aggregate production function, 212
state of technology, 213
constant returns to scale, 213
decreasing returns to capital, 213
decreasing returns to labor, 213
capital accumulation, 215
technological progress, 215
saving rate, 215
216 
The Long Run 
The Core


=== PAGE 17 ===
 
Chapter 10 
The Facts of Growth 
217
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using the information in this chapter, label each of the following 
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. On a logarithmic scale, a variable that increases at 5% per 
year will move along an upward-sloping line with a slope 
of 0.05.
b. The price of food is higher in poor countries than it is in 
rich countries.
c. Evidence suggests that happiness in rich countries 
increases with output per person.
d. In virtually all the countries of the world, output per per-
son is converging to the level of output per person in the 
United States.
e. For about 1,000 years after the fall of the Roman Empire, 
there was essentially no growth in output per person in 
Europe because any increase in output led to a propor-
tional increase in population.
f. Capital accumulation does not affect the level of output in 
the long run, only technological progress does.
g. The aggregate production function is a relation between 
output on one hand and labor and capital on the other.
2. Assume that the average consumer in Mexico and the average 
consumer in the United States buy the quantities and pay the prices 
indicated in the following table:
Food
Transportation Services
Price
Quantity
Price
Quantity
Mexico
5 pesos
400
20 pesos
200
United States
$1
1,000
$2
2,000
a. Compute US consumption per person in dollars.
b. Compute Mexican consumption per person in pesos.
c. Suppose that 1 dollar is worth 10 pesos. Compute Mexico’s 
consumption per person in dollars. This method of com-
paring consumption in Mexico to consumption in the 
United States uses market exchange rates.
d. Using the purchasing power parity method and US prices, 
compute Mexican consumption per person in dollars.
e. Under each method, how much lower is the standard of liv-
ing in Mexico than in the United States? Does the choice of 
method make a difference?
3. Consider the production function
Y = 1K 1N
a. Compute output when K = 49 and N = 81.
b. If both capital and labor double, what happens to output?
c. Is this production function characterized by constant 
returns to scale? Explain.
d. Write this production function as a relation between out-
put per worker and capital per worker.
e. Let K>N = 4. What is Y>N ? Now double K>N to 8. Does 
Y>N double as a result?
f. Does the relation between output per worker and capital 
per worker exhibit constant returns to scale?
g. Is your answer to (f) the same as your answer to (c)? Why 
or why not?
h. Plot the relation between output per worker and capital per 
worker. Does it have the same general shape as the relation 
in Figure 10-4? Explain.
DIG DEEPER
4. The growth rates of capital and output
Consider the production function given in Problem 3. Assume 
that N is constant and equal to 1. Note that if z = xa, then 
gz ≈a gx, where gz and gx are the growth rates of z and x (See 
Appendix 2 at the end of the book).
a. Given the growth approximation here, derive the relation 
between the growth rate of output and the growth rate of 
capital.
b. Suppose we want to achieve output growth equal to 2% per 
year. What is the required rate of growth of capital?
c. In part b, what happens to the ratio of capital to output 
over time?
d. Is it possible to sustain output growth of 2% forever in this 
economy? Why or why not?
5. Between 1950 and 1973, France, Germany, and Japan all expe-
rienced growth rates that were at least two percentage points higher 
than those in the United States. Yet the most important technologi-
cal advances of that period were made in the United States. How 
can this be?
EXPLORE FURTHER
Questions 6, 7, and 8 all require you find the data in the Penn 
World Tables that measures real GDP per capita using purchasing 
power parity exchange rates as described in the text. As of  the 
time of  writing, version 9 is the latest version of  this data. The 
variable rgdpo is total real output in millions of  PPP 2011 US 
dollars. The variable pop is population in millions. You will have to 
isolate these variables in the spreadsheet and construct real GDP 
per person for each country in each year. In manipulating the data 
in a very large spreadsheet, you will be able to answer Questions 
6, 7, and 8.
6. Convergence between Japan and the United States since 1960
Using the data in the Penn World Tables, find real GDP per 
capita in the United States and Japan in 1960, 1990, and the most 
recent year available.
a. Compute the average annual growth rates of GDP per per-
son for the United States and Japan for two time periods: 
1960 to 1990, and 1990 to the most recent year available. 
Did the level of real output per person in Japan tend to con-
verge to the level of real output per person in the United 
States in both of these periods? Explain.
b. Suppose that in every year since 1990, Japan and the 
United States had each continued to have their average 
annual growth rates for the period 1960 to 1990. How 
would real GDP per person compare in Japan and the 
United States today?


=== PAGE 18 ===
218 
The Long Run 
The Core
c. What actually happened to growth in real GDP per cap-
ita in Japan and the United States from 1990 to the most 
recent year available?
7. Convergence in two sets of countries
Consider three rich countries: France, Belgium, and Italy, and 
four poor countries, Ethiopia, Kenya, Nigeria, and Uganda. Define 
for each country the ratio of its real GDP per person to that of the 
United States in 1970 and in the latest year available (2014 in 
version 9 of the Penn World Tables) so that this ratio will be equal 
to 1 for the United States for all years.
a. Calculate these ratios for France, Belgium, and Italy in 1970 
and 2014 (or the latest year) over the period for which you 
have data. Does your data support the notion of convergence 
among France, Belgium, and Italy with the United States?
b. Calculate these ratios for Ethiopia, Kenya, Nigeria, and 
Uganda in 1970 and 2014. Does this data support the 
notion of convergence among Ethiopia, Kenya, Nigeria, 
and Uganda with the United States?
8. Growth successes and failures
Using the Penn World Tables, find the data on real GDP per 
person (chained series) for 1970 for all available countries. Do the 
same for a recent year of data where the data are available for most 
countries (it takes more time to produce this measure in some coun-
tries than in others).
a. Rank the countries according to GDP per person in 1970. 
List the countries with the 10 highest levels of GDP per per-
son in 1970. Are there any surprises?
b. Carry out the analysis in part (a) for the most recent year 
for which you collected data. Has the composition of the 
10 richest countries changed since 1970?
c. Use all the countries for which there are data in both 1970 
and your latest year. Which 10 countries have the highest 
rate of growth of real GDP per capita after 1970?
d. Use all the countries for which there are data in both 1970 
and your latest year. Which 10 countries have the lowest 
rate of growth of real GDP per capita after 1970?
e. Do a brief Internet search on either the country from part 
c with the greatest increase in GDP per capita or the coun-
try from part d with the smallest increase. Can you guess 
any reasons for the economic success, or lack of it, for this 
country?
9. Your institution may have a subscription to The Economist 
news magazine, or you may be able to find this graphic on the web. 
The March 23, 2019 issue, in a section entitled “Graphic Detail: 
Happiness Economics,” makes the same point as Figure 1.
a. Does happiness rise with the level of real GDP per person?
b. Contrast the growth and happiness experience of China 
and India over the period from 2005–08 to 2015–18?
FURTHER READINGS
 
■Brad deLong has a number of fascinating articles 
on growth (http://web.efzg.hr/dok/MGR/vcavrak//
Berkeley%20Faculty%20Lunch%20Talk.pdf). Read in 
particular “Berkeley Faculty Lunch Talk: Main Themes of 
Twentieth Century Economic History,” which covers many 
of the themes of this chapter.
 
■A broad presentation of facts about growth is given by  
Angus Maddison in The World Economy: A Millenium Perspec-
tive (2001). The associated site, www.theworldeconomy.
org, has a large number of facts and data on growth over 
the last two millenia.
 
■Chapter 3 in Productivity and American Leadership, by 
William Baumol, Sue Anne Batey Blackman, and Edward 
Wolff (1989), gives a vivid description of how life has 
been transformed by growth in the United States since the 
mid-1880s.
 
■The site https://ourworldindata.org/economic-growth run 
by Max Roser has a number of striking figures and facts 
about growth. You will enjoy going there.
 
■A rich description of the many dimensions of growth is 
given by Charles Jones, “The Facts of Economic Growth,” 
Handbook of Macroeconomics, 2016, Vol. 2A, pp. 3–69. 
Jones has also written a textbook on growth (Introduction 
to Economic Growth, Charles Jones and Dietrich Vollrath, 
3rd edition, W. W. Norton & Co, New York, 2013), which, if 
you want to learn more than there is in this book, I highly 
recommend.
 
■A broad presentation of facts about growth is given by 
Angus Maddison in The World Economy: A Millennial 
Perspective (2001, OECD). The associated site, www.
theworldeconomy.org, has a large number of facts and data 
on growth over the last two millennia.


=== PAGE 19 ===
219
Saving, Capital 
Accumulation,  
and Output
S
ince 1970, the US saving rate—the ratio of saving to gross domestic product (GDP)—
has averaged only 17%, compared to 23% in Germany and 29% in Japan. Would a 
higher US saving rate have led to a higher US growth rate over the period? Would 
increasing the US saving rate lead to sustained higher US growth in the future?
We gave the basic answer to these questions at the end of Chapter 10: no. Over long 
periods—an important qualification to which we will return—an economy’s growth rate does 
not depend on its saving rate. It does not appear that a higher saving rate would have led to 
higher US growth rate over the last 50 years. Nor should we expect that an increase in the 
saving rate will lead to sustained higher US growth.
This conclusion does not mean, however, that we should not be concerned about the 
low US saving rate. Even if the saving rate does not permanently affect the growth rate, 
it does affect the level of output and the standard of living. An increase in the saving rate 
would lead to higher growth for some time and eventually to a higher standard of living in 
the United States.
This chapter focuses on the effects of the saving rate on the level and growth rate of 
output.
Sections 11-1 and 11-2 look at the interactions between output and capital accumula-
tion and the effects of the saving rate.
Section 11-3 plugs in numbers to give a better sense of the magnitudes involved.
Section 11-4 extends our discussion to take into account not only physical but also 
human capital.
11
If you remember one basic message from this chapter, it should be: Capital accu-
mulation increases output, but cannot by itself sustain growth. 


=== PAGE 20 ===
220 
The Long Run 
The Core
11-1 INTERACTIONS BETWEEN OUTPUT 
AND CAPITAL
At the center of the determination of output in the long run are two relations between 
output and capital:
 
■
The amount of capital determines the amount of output being produced.
 
■
The amount of output being produced determines the amount of saving and, in 
turn, the amount of capital being accumulated over time.
Together, these two relations, which are represented in Figure 11-1, determine the evo-
lution of output and capital over time. The green arrow captures the first relation, from 
capital to output. The blue and purple arrows capture the two parts of the second rela-
tion, from output to saving and investment, and from investment to the change in the 
capital stock. Let’s look at each relation in turn.
The Effects of Capital on Output
We started discussing the first of these two relations, the effect of capital on output, in 
Section 10-4 in Chapter 10. There we introduced the aggregate production function and 
you saw that, under the assumption of constant returns to scale, we can write the follow-
ing relation between output and capital per worker (equation (10.3)):
Y
N = F a K
N, 1b
Output per worker 1Y>N2 is an increasing function of capital per worker 1K>N2. 
Under the assumption of decreasing returns to capital, the effect of a given increase in 
capital per worker on output per worker decreases as the ratio of capital per worker gets 
larger. When capital per worker is already high, further increases in capital per worker 
have only a small effect on output per worker.
To simplify notation, we will rewrite this relation between output and capital per 
worker as
Y
N = f a K
N b
where the function f represents the same relation between output and capital per worker 
as the function F:
f a K
N b K Fa K
N
, 1b
In this chapter, we shall make two further assumptions:
 
■
The first is that the size of the population, the participation rate, and the unemploy-
ment rate are all constant. This implies that employment, N, is also constant. To see 
why, go back to the relations we saw in Chapter 2 and again in Chapter 7, between 
population, the labor force, unemployment, and employment:
 – The labor force is equal to population multiplied by the participation rate. So if 
population is constant and the participation rate is constant, the labor force is 
also constant.
 – Employment, in turn, is equal to the labor force multiplied by 1 minus the unem-
ployment rate. If, for example, the size of the labor force is 100 million and the 
unemployment rate is 5%, then employment is equal to 95 million (100 million 
times (1 − 0.05)). So, if the labor force is constant and the unemployment rate is 
constant, employment is also constant.
Suppose, for example, 
that the function F has the 
double square root form 
F1K, N2 = 2K2N, so
Y = 2K2N
Divide both sides by N, so
Y>N = 2K2N>N
Note that 
2N>N = 2N>12N2N2. 
Using this result in the pre-
ceding equation leads to the 
following model of income 
per person:
Y>N = 2K> 2N = 2K>N
So, in this case, the function 
f giving the relation between 
output per worker and capi-
tal per worker is simply the 
square root function
f1K>N2 = 2K>N
c


=== PAGE 21 ===
 
Chapter 11 
Saving, Capital Accumulation, and Output 
221
Under these assumptions, output per worker, output per person, and output itself 
all move proportionately. Although we will usually refer to movements in out-
put or capital per worker, to lighten the text we shall sometimes just talk about 
movements in output or capital, leaving out the “per worker” or “per person” 
qualification.
The reason for assuming that N is constant is to make it easier to focus on how 
capital accumulation affects growth. If N is constant, the only factor of production 
that changes over time is capital. The assumption is not realistic, however, so we will 
relax it in the next two chapters. (There are two ways in which this is a simplification. 
The first is that population, and thus employment, typically increase over time. The 
other is that, in the short run, as we saw in the first nine chapters, employment may 
deviate from potential employment.)
 
■
The second assumption is that there is no technological progress, so the production 
function f (or, equivalently, F) does not change over time.
Again, the reason for making this assumption—which is obviously contrary to 
reality—is to focus just on the role of capital accumulation. In Chapter 12, we shall 
introduce technological progress and see that the basic conclusions we derive here 
about the role of capital in growth also hold when there is technological progress. 
Again, this step is better left to later.
With these two assumptions, our first relation between output and capital per 
worker, from the production side, can be written as
 
Yt
N = f a Kt
N b 
(11.1)
where we have introduced time indexes for output and capital—but not for labor, N, 
which we assume to be constant and so does not need a time index.
In words: Higher capital per worker leads to higher output per worker.
The Effects of Output on Capital Accumulation
To derive the second relation between output and capital accumulation, we proceed in 
two steps.
First, we derive the relation between output and investment.
Then we derive the relation between investment and capital accumulation.
Output and Investment
To derive the relation between output and investment, we make three assumptions:
 
■
We continue to assume that the economy is closed. As we saw in Chapter 3  
(equation (3.10)), this means that investment, I, is equal to saving—the sum of pri-
vate saving, S, and public saving, T - G.
I = S + 1T - G2
In the United States in 2017, 
output per person (in 2011 
PPP dollars) was $54,795; 
output per worker was much 
higher, at $115,120. (From 
these two numbers, can you 
derive the ratio of employ-
ment to population?)
b
From the production side: 
The level of capital per 
worker determines the level 
of output per worker.
b
As we shall see in Chapter 17, 
saving and investment need 
not be equal in an open econ-
omy. A country can save less 
than it invests, and borrow the 
difference from the rest of the 
world. This is the case for the 
United States today.
b
Capital
stock
Change in
the capital
stock
Saving/investment
Output/income
Figure 11-1
Capital, Output, and 
Saving/Investment


=== PAGE 22 ===
222 
The Long Run 
The Core
 
■
To focus on the behavior of private saving, we assume that public saving, T - G, is 
equal to zero. (We shall later relax this assumption when we focus on the effects of 
fiscal policy on growth.) With this assumption, the previous equation becomes
I = S
Investment is equal to private saving.
 
■
We assume that private saving is proportional to income, so
S = sY
The parameter s is the saving rate. It has a value between zero and 1. This assump-
tion captures two basic facts about saving. First, the saving rate does not appear 
to systematically increase or decrease as a country becomes richer. Second, richer 
countries do not appear to have systematically higher or lower saving rates than 
poorer ones.
Combining these two relations and introducing time indexes gives a simple relation 
between investment and output:
It = sYt
Investment is proportional to output; the higher output is, the higher is saving and 
so the higher is investment.
Investment and Capital Accumulation
The second step relates investment, which is a flow (the new machines produced and 
new plants built during a given period), to capital, which is a stock (the existing machines 
and plants in the economy at a point in time).
Think of time as measured in years, so t denotes year t, t + 1 denotes year t + 1, 
and so on. Think of the capital stock as being measured at the beginning of each year, 
so Kt refers to the capital stock at the beginning of year t, Kt + 1 to the capital stock at the 
beginning of year t + 1, and so on.
Assume that capital depreciates at rate d (the lowercase Greek letter delta) per year. 
That is, from one year to the next, a proportion d of the capital stock breaks down and 
becomes useless. Equivalently, a proportion 11 - d2 of the capital stock remains intact 
from one year to the next.
The evolution of the capital stock is then given by
Kt + 1 = 11 - d2Kt + It
The capital stock at the beginning of year t + 1, Kt + 1, is equal to the capital stock at 
the beginning of year t, which is still intact in year t + 1, 11 - d2Kt, plus the new capi-
tal stock put in place during year t (i.e., investment during year t, It).
We can now combine the relation between output and investment and the relation 
between investment and capital accumulation to obtain the second relation we need to 
think about growth: the relation between output and capital accumulation.
Replacing investment by its expression above and dividing both sides by N (the num-
ber of workers in the economy) gives
Kt + 1
N
= 11 - d2 Kt
N + s Yt
N
In words: Capital per worker at the beginning of year t + 1 is equal to capital per 
worker at the beginning of year t, adjusted for depreciation, plus investment per worker 
during year t, which is equal to the saving rate times output per worker during year t.
You have now seen two 
specifications of saving 
behavior (equivalently con-
sumption behavior): one for 
the short run in Chapter 3, 
and one for the long run in 
this chapter. You may won-
der how the two specifica-
tions relate to each other 
and whether they are con-
sistent. The answer is yes. 
A full discussion is given in 
Chapter 15.
c
Recall: Flows are variables 
that have a time dimension 
(that is, they are defined per 
unit of time); stocks are vari-
ables that do not have a time 
dimension (they are defined 
at a point in time). Output, 
saving, and investment are 
flows. Employment and capi-
tal are stocks.
c


=== PAGE 23 ===
 
Chapter 11 
Saving, Capital Accumulation, and Output 
223
Expanding the term 11 - d2 Kt>N to Kt>N - dKt>N, moving Kt>N to the left, and 
reorganizing the right side,
 
Kt + 1
N
-  Kt
N = s Yt
N - d Kt
N  
(11.2)
In words: The change in the capital stock per worker, represented by the difference 
between the two terms on the left, is equal to saving per worker, represented by the first 
term on the right, minus depreciation, represented by the second term on the right. This 
equation gives us the second relation between output and capital per worker.
11-2 THE IMPLICATIONS OF ALTERNATIVE 
SAVING RATES
We have derived two relations:
 
■
From the production side, we have seen in equation (11.1) how capital determines 
output.
 
■
From the saving side, we have seen in equation (11.2) how output in turn deter-
mines capital accumulation.
We can now put the two relations together and see how they determine the behavior 
of output and capital over time.
Dynamics of Capital and Output
Replacing output per worker 1Yt>N2 in equation (11.2) by its expression in terms of 
capital per worker 1Kt>N2 from equation (11.1) gives
 
 Kt + 1
N
- Kt
N  =   s f a Kt
N b -  da Kt
N b 
(11.3)
  change in capital =  investment  -  depreciation
 
from year t to year t + 1  during year t      during year t
This relation describes what happens to capital per worker. The change in capital per 
worker from this year to next year depends on the difference between two terms:
 
■
Investment per worker, the first term on the right: The level of capital per worker 
this year determines output per worker this year. Given the saving rate, output per 
worker determines the amount of saving per worker and thus the investment per 
worker this year.
 
■
Depreciation per worker, the second term on the right: The capital stock per worker 
determines the amount of depreciation per worker this year.
If investment per worker exceeds depreciation per worker, the change in capital per 
worker is positive. Capital per worker increases.
If investment per worker is less than depreciation per worker, the change in capital 
per worker is negative. Capital per worker decreases.
Given capital per worker, output per worker is then given by equation (11.1):
Yt
N = f a Kt
N b
From the saving side: The 
level of output per worker 
determines the change in the 
level of capital per worker 
over time.
b
Kt
 >  N 1 f1Kt
 >  N2 1 sf1Kt
 >  N2
b
Kt
 >  N 1 dKt
 >  N
b


=== PAGE 24 ===
224 
The Long Run 
The Core
The hard work is done. Equations (11.3) and (11.1) contain all the information 
we need to understand the dynamics of capital and output over time. The easiest way 
to interpret them is to use a graph. We do this in Figure 11-2: Output per worker is 
measured on the vertical axis, and capital per worker is measured on the horizontal axis.
In Figure 11-2, look first at the curve representing output per worker, f 1Kt>N2, as 
a function of capital per worker. The relation is the same as in Figure 10-4: Output per 
worker increases with capital per worker, but, because of decreasing returns to capital, 
the effect is smaller the higher the level of capital per worker.
Now look at the two curves representing the two components on the right side of 
equation (11.3):
 
■
The relation representing investment per worker, s f 1Kt>N2, has the same shape as 
the production function except that it is lower by a factor s (the saving rate). Suppose 
the level of capital per worker is equal to K0>N in Figure 11-2. Output per worker 
is then given by the vertical distance AB, and investment per worker is given by the 
vertical distance AC, which is equal to s times the vertical distance AB. Thus, just like 
output per worker, investment per worker increases with capital per worker, but by 
less and less as capital per worker increases. When capital per worker is already high, 
the effect of a further increase in capital per worker on output per worker, and by 
implication on investment per worker, is small.
 
■
The relation representing depreciation per worker, d Kt>N, is represented by a 
straight line. Depreciation per worker increases in proportion to capital per worker 
so the relation is represented by a straight line with slope equal to d. At the level of 
capital per worker K0>N, depreciation per worker is given by the vertical distance AD.
The change in capital per worker is given by the difference between investment per 
worker and depreciation per worker. At K0>N, the difference is positive; investment per 
worker exceeds depreciation per worker by an amount represented by the vertical distance 
CD = AC - AD, so capital per worker increases. As we move to the right along the hori-
zontal axis and look at higher and higher levels of capital per worker, investment increases 
by less and less, while depreciation keeps increasing in proportion to capital. For some level 
of capital per worker, K*>N in Figure 11-2, investment is just enough to cover deprecia-
tion, and capital per worker remains constant. To the left of K*  >N, investment exceeds 
depreciation and capital per worker increases. This is indicated by the arrows pointing 
to the right along the curve representing the production function. To the right of K*>N, 
To make the graph easier 
to read, I have assumed an 
unrealistically high saving 
rate. (Can you tell roughly 
what value I have assumed 
for s? What would be a 
plausible value for s?) c
Output per worker, 
Capital per worker, 
0
Investment per worker
Output per worker
(
)
Depreciation per worker
f Kt/N
Kt/N
(
)
f Kt /N
s
Y / N
K/N
K
K
(
)
/N
/N
Y/N
Figure 11-2
Capital and Output 
Dynamics
When capital and output are 
low, investment exceeds dep-
reciation and capital increases. 
When capital and output 
are high, investment is less 
than depreciation and capital 
dec reases.


=== PAGE 25 ===
 
Chapter 11 
Saving, Capital Accumulation, and Output 
225
depreciation exceeds investment, and capital per worker decreases. This is indicated by the 
arrows pointing to the left along the curve representing the production function.
Characterizing the evolution of capital per worker and output per worker over time now 
is easy. Consider an economy that starts with a low level of capital per worker—say, K0>  N 
in Figure 11-2. Because investment exceeds depreciation at this point, capital per worker 
increases. And because output moves with capital, output per worker increases as well. 
Capital per worker eventually reaches K*>N, the level at which investment is equal to depreci-
ation. Once the economy has reached the level of capital per worker K*>N, output per worker 
and capital per worker remain constant at Y*>N and K*>N, their long-run equilibrium levels.
Think, for example, of a country that loses part of its capital stock, say as a result of 
bombing during a war. The mechanism we have just seen suggests that, if the country 
has suffered larger capital losses than population losses, it will come out of the war with 
a low level of capital per worker; that is, at a point to the left of K*>N. The country will 
then experience a large increase in both capital per worker and output per worker for 
some time. This describes well what happened after World War II to countries that had 
proportionately larger destructions of capital than losses of human lives (see the Focus 
Box “Capital Accumulation and Growth in France in the Aftermath of World War II”).
If a country starts instead from a high level of capital per worker—that is, from a point to 
the right of K*>N—then depreciation will exceed investment, and capital per worker and out-
put per worker will decrease. The initial level of capital per worker is too high to be sustained 
given the saving rate. This decrease in capital per worker will continue until the economy 
again reaches the point where investment is equal to depreciation and capital per worker is 
equal to K*>N. From then on, capital per worker and output per worker will remain constant.
Let’s look more closely at the levels of output per worker and capital per worker to which 
the economy converges in the long run. The state in which output per worker and capital 
per worker are no longer changing is called the steady state of the economy. Setting the 
left side of equation (11.3) equal to zero (in steady state, by definition, the change in capital 
per worker is zero), the steady-state value of capital per worker, K*>N, is given by
 
s f a K*
N b = d K*
N  
(11.4)
The steady-state value of capital per worker is such that the amount of saving per 
worker (the left side) is just sufficient to cover depreciation of the capital stock per worker 
(the right side of the equation).
Given steady-state capital per worker 1K*>N2, the steady-state value of output per 
worker 1Y*>N2 is given by the production function
 
Y*
N = f a K*
N b 
(11.5)
We now have all the elements we need to discuss the effects of the saving rate on 
output per worker, both over time and in steady state.
The Saving Rate and Output
Let’s return to the question we posed at the beginning of the chapter: How does the saving 
rate affect the growth rate of output per worker? Our analysis leads to a three-part answer:
1. The saving rate has no effect on the long-run growth rate of output per worker, which is 
equal to zero.
This conclusion is rather obvious; we have seen that, eventually, the economy 
converges to a constant level of output per worker. In other words, in the long run, 
the growth rate of output is equal to zero, no matter what the saving rate is.
When capital per worker is 
low, capital per worker and 
output per worker increase 
over time. When capital 
per worker is high, capital 
per worker and output per 
worker decrease over time.
b
What does the model predict 
for postwar growth if a coun-
try suffers proportional losses 
in population and in capital? 
Do you find this answer con-
vincing? What elements may 
be missing from the model?
b
K*>N is the long-run level of 
capital per worker.
b


=== PAGE 26 ===
226 
The Long Run 
The Core
Capital Accumulation and Growth in France 
in the Aftermath of World War II
When World War II ended in 1945, France had suffered 
some of the heaviest losses of all European countries. The 
losses in lives were large; out of a population of 42 mil-
lion, more than 550,000 people died. Relatively speaking, 
though, the losses in capital were much larger. It is esti-
mated that the French capital stock in 1945 was about 30% 
below its prewar value. A vivid picture of the destruction of 
capital is provided by the numbers in Table 1.
The model of growth we have just seen makes a clear 
prediction about what will happen to a country that loses 
a large part of its capital stock. The country will experience 
high capital accumulation and output growth for some time. 
In terms of Figure 11-2, a country with capital per worker 
initially far below K*>N will grow rapidly as it converges to 
K*>N and output per worker converges to Y*>N.
This prediction fares well in the case of postwar France. 
There is plenty of anecdotal evidence that small increases 
in capital led to large increases in output. Minor repairs to 
a major bridge would lead to the reopening of the bridge. 
Reopening the bridge would significantly shorten the travel 
time between two cities, leading to much lower transport 
costs. The lower transport costs would then enable a plant to 
get much-needed inputs, increase its production, and so on.
More convincing evidence, however, comes directly from 
actual aggregate output numbers. From 1946 to 1950, the 
annual growth rate of French real GDP was a high 9.6% per 
year. This led to an increase in real GDP of about 60% over 
5 years.
Was all of the increase in French GDP the result of capi-
tal accumulation? The answer is no. There were other forces 
at work in addition to the mechanism in our model. Much 
of the remaining capital stock in 1945 was old. Investment 
had been low in the 1930s (a decade dominated by the Great 
Depression) and nearly nonexistent during the war. A good 
portion of the postwar capital accumulation was associated 
with the introduction of more modern capital and the use of 
more modern production techniques. This was another rea-
son for the high growth rates of the postwar period.1
There is, however, a way of thinking about this conclusion that will be useful when 
we allow for technological progress in Chapter 12. Think of what would be needed to 
sustain a constant positive growth rate of output per worker in the long run. Capital per 
worker would have to increase. Not only that, but because of decreasing returns to capi-
tal, it would have to increase faster than output per worker. This implies that each year the 
economy would have to save a larger and larger fraction of its output and dedicate it to 
capital accumulation. At some point, the fraction of output it would need to save would 
be greater than 1—something clearly impossible. This is why it is impossible, absent tech-
nological progress, to sustain a constant positive growth rate forever. In the long run, 
capital per worker must be constant, and so output per worker must also be constant.
2. Nonetheless, the saving rate determines the level of output per worker in the long run. 
Other things being equal, countries with a higher saving rate will achieve higher 
output per worker in the long run.
Figure 11-3 illustrates this point. Consider two countries with the same 
production function, the same level of employment, and the same deprecia-
tion rate, but with different saving rates, say s0 and s1 7 s0. Figure 11-3 draws 
Some economists argue 
that the high output growth 
achieved by the Soviet Union 
from 1950 to 1990 was 
the result of such a steady 
increase in the saving rate over 
time, which could not be sus-
tained forever. Paul Krugman 
has used the term Stalinist 
growth to denote this type of 
growth, which is growth result-
ing from a higher and higher 
saving rate over time.
c
Note that the first proposi-
tion is a statement about the 
growth rate of output per 
worker. The second proposi-
tion is a statement about the 
level of output per worker.
c
FOCUS
Table 1 
Proportion of the French Capital Stock Destroyed by the End of World War II
Railways
Tracks
6%
Rivers
Waterways
86%
Stations
38%
Canal locks
11%
Engines
21%
Barges
80%
Hardware
60%
Buildings
(numbers)
Roads
Cars
31%
Dwellings
1,229,000
Trucks
40%
Industrial
246,000
1Source: Gilles Saint-Paul, “Economic Reconstruction in France, 1945–1958,” in Rudiger Dornbusch, Willem Nolling, and 
Richard Layard, eds., Postwar Economic Reconstruction and Lessons for the East Today (1993, MIT Press).


=== PAGE 27 ===
 
Chapter 11 
Saving, Capital Accumulation, and Output 
227
their common production function, f1Kt>N2, and the functions showing sav-
ing/investment per worker as a function of capital per worker for each of the 
two countries, s0 f1Kt>N2 and s1 f1Kt>N2. In the long run, the country with 
saving rate s0 will reach the level of capital per worker K0>N and output per 
worker Y0>N. The country with saving rate s1 will reach the higher levels K1>N  
and Y1>N.
3. An increase in the saving rate will lead to higher growth of output per worker for some time, 
but not forever.
This conclusion follows from the two propositions we just discussed. From 
the first, we know that an increase in the saving rate does not affect the long-run 
growth rate of  output per worker, which remains equal to zero. From the second, we 
know that an increase in the saving rate leads to an increase in the long-run level 
of  output per worker. It follows that, as output per worker increases to its new higher 
level in response to the increase in the saving rate, the economy will go through 
a period of positive growth. This period of growth will come to an end when the 
economy reaches its new steady state.
We can use Figure 11-3 again to illustrate this point. Consider a country that has 
an initial saving rate of s0. Assume that capital per worker is initially equal to K0>N, 
with associated output per worker Y0>N. Now consider the effects of an increase in 
the saving rate from s0 to s1. The relation giving saving/investment per worker as a 
function of capital per worker shifts upward from s0 f1Kt>N2 to s1 f1Kt>N2.
At the initial level of capital per worker, K0>N, investment exceeds depreciation, 
so capital per worker increases. As capital per worker increases, so does output per 
worker, and the economy goes through a period of positive growth. When capital per 
worker eventually reaches K1>N, however, investment is again equal to depreciation, 
and growth ends. From then on, the economy remains at K1>N, with associated out-
put per worker Y1>N. The movement of output per worker is plotted against time in 
Figure 11-4. Output per worker is initially constant at level Y0>N. After an increase 
in the saving rate at time t, output per worker increases for some time until it reaches 
Y1>N and the growth rate returns to zero.
We have derived these three results under the assumption that there was no 
technological progress, and therefore, no growth of output per worker in the long 
run. But, as we will see in Chapter 12, the three results extend to an economy in 
which there is technological progress. Let us briefly see how.
Capital per worker, 
0
1
Output per worker, 
Investment per worker
1
Investment per worker
Output per worker
(
)
Depreciation per worker
1
0
f Kt/N
Kt/N
(
)
f Kt /N
s
0 (
)
f Kt/N
s
Y
Y
/N
/N
Y/N
K/N
K
K
/N
/N
Figure 11-3
The Effects of Different 
Saving Rates
A country with a higher sav-
ing rate achieves a higher 
steady-state level of output 
per worker.


=== PAGE 28 ===
228 
The Long Run 
The Core
An economy in which there is technological progress has a positive growth rate of 
output per worker, even in the long run. This long-run growth rate is independent of the 
saving rate—the extension of the first result just discussed. The saving rate affects the 
level of output per worker, however—the extension of the second result. An increase in 
the saving rate leads to growth greater than steady-state growth for some time until the 
economy reaches its new higher path—the extension of our third result.
These three results are illustrated in Figure 11-5, which extends Figure 11-4 by plot-
ting the effect of an increase in the saving rate on an economy with positive technologi-
cal progress. The figure uses a logarithmic scale to measure output per worker. It follows 
that an economy in which output per worker grows at a constant rate is represented by a 
line with slope equal to that growth rate. At the initial saving rate, s0, the economy moves 
along AA. If, at time t, the saving rate increases to s1, the economy experiences higher 
growth for some time until it reaches its new, higher path, BB. The growth rate then 
becomes the same as before the increase in the saving rate (that is, the slope of BB is the 
same as the slope of AA).
The Saving Rate and Consumption
Governments can affect the saving rate in various ways. First, they can vary public 
saving. Given private saving, positive public saving—a budget surplus, in other words—
leads to higher overall saving. Conversely, negative public saving—a budget deficit—
leads to lower overall saving. Second, governments can use taxes to affect private saving. 
For example, they can give tax breaks to people who save, making it more attractive to 
save and thus increasing private saving.
See the discussion of loga-
rithmic scales in Appendix 2 
at the end of the book. c
Recall: Saving is the sum of 
private plus public saving. 
Recall also that 
Public saving 3  Budget
surplus; 
Public dissaving 3  Budget 
deficit. c
Time
Output per worker, 
Associated with saving rate 
1 > 
0
Associated with saving rate 
0
1
Y /N
0
Y /N
t
s
s
s
Y/N
Figure 11-4
The Effects of an Increase 
in the Saving Rate on 
Output per Worker in 
an Economy without 
Technological Progress
An increase in the saving rate 
leads to a period of higher 
growth until output reaches 
its new higher steady-state 
level.
Time
Output per worker, 
(log scale)
Associated
with saving
rate
1 > 
0
Associated with saving rate 
0
s
s
B
A
s
A
t
B
Y/N
Figure 11-5
The Effects of an Increase 
in the Saving Rate on 
Output per Worker 
in an Economy with 
Technological Progress
An increase in the saving rate 
leads to a period of higher 
growth until output reaches a 
new, higher path.


=== PAGE 29 ===
 
Chapter 11 
Saving, Capital Accumulation, and Output 
229
What saving rate should governments aim for? To think about the answer, we must 
shift our focus from the behavior of output to the behavior of consumption. The reason: 
What matters to people is not how much is produced, but how much they consume.
It is clear that an increase in saving must come initially at the expense of lower con-
sumption (except when we think it helpful, we drop “per worker” in this subsection and 
just refer to consumption rather than consumption per worker, capital rather than capi-
tal per worker, and so on). A change in the saving rate this year has no effect on capital 
this year and consequently no effect on output and income this year. So an increase in 
saving comes initially with an equal decrease in consumption.
Does an increase in saving lead to an increase in consumption in the long run? Not 
necessarily. Consumption may decrease, not only initially but also in the long run. You may 
find this surprising. After all, we know from Figure 11-3 that an increase in the saving rate 
always leads to an increase in the level of output per worker. But output is not the same as con-
sumption. To see why not, consider what happens for two extreme values of the saving rate.
 
■
An economy in which the saving rate is (and has always been) zero is an economy 
in which capital is equal to zero. In this case, output is also equal to zero, and so is 
consumption. A saving rate equal to zero implies zero consumption in the long run.
 
■
Now consider an economy in which the saving rate is equal to one. People save all 
their income. The level of capital, and thus output, in this economy will be high. But 
because people save all of their income, consumption is equal to zero. What happens 
is that the economy is carrying an excessive amount of capital. Simply maintaining 
that level of output requires that all output be devoted to replacing depreciation! A 
saving rate equal to one also implies zero consumption in the long run.
These two extreme cases mean that there must be some value of the saving rate 
between zero and one that maximizes the steady-state level of consumption. Increases 
in the saving rate below this value lead to a decrease in consumption initially, but they 
lead to an increase in consumption in the long run. Increases in the saving rate beyond 
this value decrease consumption not only initially but also in the long run. This hap-
pens because the increase in capital associated with the increase in the saving rate leads 
to only a small increase in output—an increase that is too small to cover the increased 
depreciation. In other words, the economy carries too much capital. The level of capital 
associated with the value of the saving rate that yields the highest level of consumption 
in steady state is known as the golden-rule level of capital. Increases in capital beyond 
the golden-rule level reduce steady-state consumption.
This argument is illustrated in Figure 11-6, which plots consumption per worker 
in steady state (on the vertical axis) against the saving rate (on the horizontal axis). 
Because we assume that 
employment is constant, we 
are ignoring the short-run 
effect of an increase in the 
saving rate on output we 
focused on in Chapters 3, 5, 
and 9. In the short run, not 
only does an increase in the 
saving rate reduce consump-
tion given income, but it may 
also create a recession and 
decrease income further. We 
shall return to a discussion 
of short-run and long-run 
effects of changes in saving 
in Chapters 16 and 22.
c
Saving rate, s
1
0
Consumption per worker, 
Maximum steady-state
consumption per worker
sG
C/N
Figure 11-6
The Effects of the Saving 
Rate on Steady-State 
Consumption per Worker
An increase in the saving rate 
leads to an increase, then to 
a decrease in steady-state 
consumption per worker.


=== PAGE 30 ===
230 
The Long Run 
The Core
A saving rate equal to zero implies a capital stock per worker equal to zero, a level of 
output per worker equal to zero, and, by implication, a level of consumption per worker 
equal to zero. For s between zero and sG (G for golden rule), a higher saving rate leads to 
higher capital per worker, higher output per worker, and higher consumption per worker. 
For s larger than sG, increases in the saving rate still lead to higher values of capital per 
worker and output per worker; but they now lead to lower values of consumption per 
worker. This is because the increase in output is more than offset by the increase in depre-
ciation as a result of the larger capital stock. For s = 1, consumption per worker is equal 
to zero. Capital per worker and output per worker are high, but all of the output is used 
just to replace depreciation, leaving nothing for consumption.
If an economy already has so much capital that it is operating beyond the golden 
rule, then increasing saving further will decrease consumption not only now, but also 
later. Is this a relevant worry? Do some countries actually have too much capital? The 
empirical evidence indicates that OECD countries are typically below their golden-rule 
level of capital. If they were to increase the saving rate, it would lead to higher consump-
tion in the future—not lower consumption.
This means that, in practice, governments face a trade-off: An increase in the sav-
ing rate leads to lower consumption for some time but higher consumption later. So 
what should governments do? How close to the golden rule should they try to get? That 
depends on how much weight they put on the welfare of current generations—who are 
more likely to lose from policies aimed at increasing the saving rate—versus the welfare 
of future generations—who are more likely to gain. Enter politics: Future generations do 
not vote. This means that governments are unlikely to ask current generations to make 
large sacrifices, which, in turn, means that countries are more likely to underinvest than 
overinvest. These intergenerational issues are at the forefront of the debate on Social 
Security reform in the United States. The Focus Box “Social Security, Saving, and Capital 
Accumulation in the United States” explores this further.
11-3 GETTING A SENSE OF MAGNITUDES
How big an impact does a change in the saving rate have on output in the long run? For 
how long and by how much does an increase in the saving rate affect growth? How far is 
the United States from the golden-rule level of capital? To get a better sense of the answers 
to these questions, let’s now make more specific assumptions, plug in some numbers, and 
see what we get.
Assume the production function is
 
Y = 2K2 N 
(11.6)
Output equals the product of the square root of capital and the square root of labor. 
(A more general specification of the production function known as the Cobb-Douglas 
production function, and its implications for growth, is given in the appendix to this 
chapter.)
Dividing both sides by N (because we are interested in output per worker),
Y
N = 2K2N
N
= 2K
2N
= A
K
N
Output per worker equals the square root of capital per worker. Put another way, the 
production function f relating output per worker to capital per worker is given by
f a Kt
N b = A
Kt
N
Check that this production 
function exhibits both con-
stant returns to scale and 
decreasing returns to either 
capital or labor.
c
The second equality 
follows from 2N>N=
2N>12N2N2 = 1> 2N. c


=== PAGE 31 ===
 
Chapter 11 
Saving, Capital Accumulation, and Output 
231
Social Security, Saving, and Capital 
Accumulation in the United States
Social Security was introduced in the United States in 1935. 
The goal of the program was to make sure the elderly would 
have enough to live on. Over time, Social Security has 
become the largest government program in the United States. 
Benefits paid to retirees now exceed 4% of GDP. For two-
thirds of retirees, Social Security benefits account for more 
than 50% of their income. There is little question that, on its 
own terms, the Social Security system has been a great suc-
cess and has decreased poverty among the elderly. There is 
also little question that it has also led to a lower US saving 
rate and therefore lower capital accumulation and lower out-
put per person in the long run.
To understand why, we must take a theoretical detour. 
Think of an economy in which there is no social security 
system—one where workers must save to provide for their 
own retirement. Now, introduce a social security system that 
collects taxes from workers and distributes benefits to the 
retirees. It can do so in one of two ways:
 
■
One way is by taxing workers, investing their contribu-
tions in financial assets, and paying back the principal 
plus the interest to the workers when they retire. Such a 
system is called a fully funded social security system: 
At any time, the system has funds equal to the accumu-
lated contributions of workers, from which it will be able 
to pay benefits to these workers when they retire.
 
■
The other way is by taxing workers and redistributing 
the tax contributions as benefits to the current retirees. 
Such a system is called a pay-as-you-go social secu-
rity system. The system pays benefits out “as it goes,” 
that is, as it collects them through contributions.
From the point of view of workers, the two systems may 
look broadly similar. In both cases, people pay contributions 
when they work and receive benefits when they retire. But 
there are two major differences.
First, what retirees receive is different in each case:
 
■
What they receive in a fully funded system depends on 
the rate of return on the financial assets held by the 
fund.
 
■
What they receive in a pay-as-you-go system depends on 
demographics—the ratio of retirees to workers—and 
on the evolution of the tax rate set by the system. When 
the population ages and the ratio of retirees to work-
ers increases, then either retirees receive less or work-
ers must contribute more. This is the case in the United 
States today. The ratio of retirees to workers, which is 
about 0.3 today, is forecast to increase to 0.4–0.5 in 20 
years. Under current rules, benefits will increase from 
5% of GDP today to 6% in 20 years. Thus, either ben-
efits will have to be reduced, in which case the rate of 
return to workers who contributed in the past will be 
low, or contributions will have to be increased, in which 
case this will decrease the rate of return to workers who 
are contributing today, or more likely, some combina-
tion of both will have to be implemented.
Second, and leaving aside the aging issue, the two sys-
tems have different macroeconomic implications:
 
■
In the fully funded system, workers save less because 
they anticipate receiving benefits when they are old. 
But the Social Security system saves on their behalf, 
by investing their contributions in financial assets. The 
presence of a social security system changes the com-
position of overall saving: Private saving goes down, 
and public saving goes up. But, to a first approximation, 
it has no effect on total saving and therefore no effect on 
capital accumulation.
 
■
In the pay-as-you-go system, workers also save less 
because they again anticipate receiving benefits when 
they are old. But now, the Social Security system does 
not save on their behalf. The decrease in private saving is 
not compensated by an increase in public saving. Total 
saving goes down, and so does capital accumulation.
Most social security systems are somewhere between 
pay-as-you-go and fully funded systems. When the US system 
was set up in 1935, the intention was to partially fund it. But 
this did not happen. Rather than being invested, contribu-
tions from workers were used to pay benefits to the retirees, 
and this has been the case ever since. Today, because contri-
butions have slightly exceeded benefits since the early 1980s, 
Social Security has built a Social Security trust fund. But 
this trust fund is far smaller than the value of benefits prom-
ised to current contributors when they retire. The US system 
is basically a pay-as-you-go system, and this has probably led 
to a lower US saving rate over the last 70 years.
In this context, some economists and politicians have 
suggested that the United States should shift back to a fully 
funded system. One of their arguments is that the US saving 
rate is indeed too low and that funding the Social Security 
system would increase it. Such a shift could be achieved by 
investing, from now on, tax contributions in financial assets 
rather than distributing them as benefits to retirees. Under 
such a shift, the Social Security system would steadily accu-
mulate funds and would eventually become fully funded. 
Martin Feldstein, an economist at Harvard and an advocate 
of such a shift, has concluded that it could lead to a 34% 
increase of the capital stock in the long run.
How should we think about such a proposal? It would 
probably have been a good idea to fully fund the system at the 
start. The United States would have a higher saving rate. The 
US capital stock would be higher, and output and consump-
tion would also be higher. But we cannot rewrite history. The 
existing system has promised benefits to retirees and these 
promises must be honored. This means that, under the pro-
posal just described, current workers would, in effect, have to 
contribute twice; once to fund the system and finance their 
FOCUS


=== PAGE 32 ===
232 
The Long Run 
The Core
Replacing f1Kt>N2 by 2Kt>N in equation (11.3),
 
Kt + 1
N
- Kt
N = sA
Kt
N - d Kt
N  
(11.7)
This equation describes the evolution of capital per worker over time. Let’s look at 
what it implies.
The Effects of the Saving Rate on Steady-State Output
How big an impact does an increase in the saving rate have on the steady-state level of 
output per worker?
Start with equation (11.7). In steady state the amount of capital per worker is con-
stant, so the left side of the equation equals zero. This implies
s A
K*
N = d K*
N
(We have dropped time indexes, which are no longer needed because in steady state 
K>N is constant. The star is to remind you that we are looking at the steady-state value of 
capital.) Square both sides:
s2 K*
N = d2a K*
N b
2
Divide both sides by 1K>N2 and reorganize:
 
K*
N = a s
db
2
 
(11.8)
Steady-state capital per worker is equal to the square of the ratio of the saving rate 
to the depreciation rate.
From equations (11.6) and (11.8), steady-state output per worker is given by
 
Y*
N = C
K*
N = Ca s
db
2
= s
d 
(11.9)
own retirement, and then again to finance the benefits owed 
to current retirees. This would impose a disproportionate 
cost on current workers. And this would come on top of the 
problems coming from the aging of population which will 
increase the ratio of retirees to workers, and will require, if 
retirement benefits are to be maintained, larger contributions 
from workers. The practical implication is that, if it is to hap-
pen, the move to a fully funded system will have to be slow, so 
that the burden of adjustment does not fall too much on one 
generation relative to the others.
The debate is likely to be with us for some time. In assess-
ing proposals from the administration or from Congress, ask 
yourself how they deal with these issues. Take, for example, 
the proposal to allow workers, from now on, to make contri-
butions to personal accounts instead of to the Social Security 
system, and to be able to draw from these accounts when they 
retire. By itself, this proposal would clearly increase private 
saving: Workers would be saving more. But its ultimate effect 
on saving depends on how the benefits already promised to 
current workers and retirees by the Social Security system are 
financed. If, as is the case under some proposals, these benefits 
are financed not through additional taxes but through debt 
finance, then the increase in private saving will be offset by 
an increase in deficits (i.e., a decrease in public saving). The 
shift to personal accounts will not increase the US saving rate. 
If, instead, these benefits are financed through higher taxes, 
then the US saving rate will increase, but current workers will 
have to both contribute to their personal accounts and pay 
the higher taxes. They will indeed pay twice.
To follow the debate on Social Security, look at the site 
run by the (nonpartisan) Concord Coalition (www.con-
cordcoalition.org) and find the discussion related to Social 
Security, or look at the annual report of the Social Security 
Administration, www.ssa.gov/OACT/TR/2018/tr2018.pdf.


=== PAGE 33 ===
 
Chapter 11 
Saving, Capital Accumulation, and Output 
233
Steady-state output per worker is equal to the ratio of the saving rate to the deprecia-
tion rate.
A higher saving rate and a lower depreciation rate both lead to higher steady-
state capital per worker (equation (11.8)) and higher steady-state output per worker 
(equation (11.9)). To see what this means, let’s take a numerical example. Suppose the 
depreciation rate is 10% per year and the saving rate is also 10%. Then, from equa-
tions (11.8) and (11.9), steady-state capital per worker and output per worker are 
both equal to 1. Now suppose that the saving rate doubles, from 10% to 20%. It fol-
lows from equation (11.8) that in the new steady state, capital per worker increases 
from 1 to 4. And, from equation (11.9), output per worker doubles, from 1 to 2. Thus, 
doubling the saving rate leads, in the long run, to doubling the output per worker. This 
is a large effect.
The Dynamic Effects of an Increase in the Saving Rate
We have just seen that an increase in the saving rate leads to an increase in the steady-
state level of output. But how long does it take for output to reach its new steady-state 
level? Put another way, by how much and for how long does an increase in the saving 
rate affect the growth rate?
To answer these questions, we must use equation (11.7) and solve it for capital per 
worker in year 0, in year 1, and so on.
Suppose that the saving rate, which had always been equal to 10%, increases in 
year 0 from 10% to 20% and remains at this higher value forever. In year 0, nothing 
happens to the capital stock (recall that it takes one year for higher saving and higher 
investment to show up in higher capital). So capital per worker remains equal to the 
steady-state value associated with a saving rate of 0.1. From equation (11.8),
K0
N = (0.1>0.1)2 = 12 = 1
In year 1, equation (11.7) gives
K1
N - K0
N = sA
K0
N - dK0
N
With a depreciation rate equal to 0.1 and a saving rate now equal to 0.2, this equa-
tion implies
K1
N - 1 = 310.2212124 - 310.1214
so
K1
N = 1.1
In the same way, we can solve for K2
 >  N, and so on. Once we have determined 
the values of capital per worker in year 0, year 1, and so on, we can then use equa-
tion (11.6) to solve for output per worker in year 0, year 1, and so on. The results of 
this computation are presented in Figure 11-7. Panel (a) plots the level of output per 
worker against time. (Y>N) increases from its initial value of 1 in year 0 to its steady-
state value of 2 in the long run. Panel (b) gives the same information in a different 


=== PAGE 34 ===
234 
The Long Run 
The Core
way, plotting instead the growth rate of output per worker against time. As panel (b) 
shows, growth of output per worker is highest at the beginning and then decreases 
over time. As the economy reaches its new steady state, growth of output per worker 
returns to zero.
Figure 11-7 clearly shows that the adjustment to the new, higher, long-run 
equilibrium takes a long time. It is only 40% complete after 10 years, and 63% com-
plete after 20 years. Put another way, the increase in the saving rate increases the 
growth rate of  output per worker for a long time. The average annual growth rate is 
3.1% for the first 10 years, and 1.5% for the next 10. Although the changes in the 
saving rate have no effect on growth in the long run, they do lead to higher growth 
for a long time.
To go back to the question raised at the beginning of  the chapter, would US 
growth have been substantially higher if  the saving rate had been higher since 
1950? The answer would be yes if  the United States had had a higher saving 
rate in the past, and if  this saving rate had fallen substantially in the last 70 years. 
Then, this fall in the saving rate would have led, other things being equal, to lower 
growth in the United States in the last 70 years along the lines of  the  mechanism 
in Figure 11-7 (with the sign reversed, as we would be looking at a decrease, 
The difference between 
investment and depreciation 
is largest at the beginning. 
This is why capital accu-
mulation, and in turn output 
growth, are highest at the 
beginning.
c
Level of output per worker, 
2.00
1.75
1.50
1.25
1.00
0
Years
(a) Effect on the level of output per worker
Growth rate of output per worker (percent) 
5
4
3
2
1
0
(b) Effect on output growth
10
20
30
40
50
0
Years
10
20
30
40
50
Y/N
Figure 11-7
The Dynamic Effects of 
an Increase in the Saving 
Rate from 10% to 20% 
on the Level and Growth 
Rate of Output per 
Worker
It takes a long time for output 
to adjust to its new higher 
level after an increase in the 
saving rate. Put another way, 
an increase in the saving 
rate leads to a long period of 
higher growth.


=== PAGE 35 ===
 
Chapter 11 
Saving, Capital Accumulation, and Output 
235
not an increase, in the saving rate). But this is not the case. The US saving rate has 
been low for a long time.
The US Saving Rate and the Golden Rule
What is the saving rate that would maximize steady-state consumption per 
worker? Recall that, in steady state, consumption is equal to what is left after 
enough is put aside to maintain a constant level of capital. More formally, in steady 
state, consumption per worker is equal to output per worker minus depreciation per 
worker:
C
N = Y
N - d K
N
Using equations (11.8) and (11.9) for the steady-state values of output per worker 
and capital per worker, consumption per worker is thus given by
C
N = s
d - da s
db
2
= s(1 - s)
d
Using this equation, together with equations (11.8) and (11.9), Table 11-1 gives 
the steady-state values of capital per worker, output per worker, and consumption 
per worker for different values of the saving rate (and for a depreciation rate equal 
to 10%).
Steady-state consumption per worker is largest when s equals 1/2. In other words, 
the golden-rule level of capital is associated with a saving rate of 50%. Below that level, 
increases in the saving rate lead to an increase in long-run consumption per worker. We 
saw previously that the average US saving rate since 1970 has been only 17%. So we 
can be quite confident that, at least in the United States, an increase in the saving rate 
would increase both output per worker and consumption per worker in the long run. 
What could be done to increase the saving rate is discussed in the Focus Box “Nudging US 
Households to Save More.”
This may, however, not be 
true of all countries in the 
world. Some researchers 
argue that China, with a sav-
ing rate of close to 50%, may 
indeed be on the other side 
of the golden rule.
b
Check your understanding of 
the issues: Using the equa-
tions in this section, argue 
the pros and cons of policy 
measures aimed at increas-
ing the US saving rate.
b
Table 11-1 
 The Saving Rate and the Steady-State Levels of Capital, Output, and 
Consumption per Worker
Saving Rate s
Capital per  
Worker K/N
Output per  
Worker Y/N
Consumption per 
Worker C/N
0.0
    0.0
  0.0
0.0
0.1
    1.0
  1.0
0.9
0.2
    4.0
  2.0
1.6
0.3
    9.0
  3.0
2.1
0.4
  16.0
  4.0
2.4
0.5
  25.0
  5.0
2.5
0.6
  36.0
  6.0
2.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
1.0
100.0
10.0
0.0


=== PAGE 36 ===
236 
The Long Run 
The Core
11-4 PHYSICAL VERSUS HUMAN CAPITAL
We have concentrated so far on physical capital—machines, plants, office buildings, and so 
on. But economies have another type of capital: the skills of the workers in the economy, or 
what economists call human capital. An economy with many highly skilled workers is likely 
to be much more productive than an economy in which most workers cannot read or write.
The increase in human capital has been as large as the increase in physical capi-
tal over the last two centuries. At the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, only 30% 
of the population of the countries that now constitute the OECD knew how to read; 
today, the literacy rate in OECD countries is above 95%. Schooling was not compulsory 
prior to the Industrial Revolution; today it is compulsory, usually until the age of 16. Still, 
there are large differences across countries. Today, in OECD countries, nearly 100% of 
children get a primary education, 90% get a secondary education, and 38% get a higher 
education. The corresponding numbers in poor countries, countries with GDP per per-
son below $400, are 95%, 32%, and 4%, respectively.
How should we think about the effect of human capital on output? How does the 
introduction of human capital change our earlier conclusions? These are the questions 
we take up in this last section.
Extending the Production Function
The most natural way of extending our analysis to allow for human capital is to modify 
the production function relation (11.1) to read
Y
N = f a K
N
, H
N b
 
   1+, +2 
(11.10)
Even this comparison may be 
misleading because the qual-
ity of education can be quite 
different across countries.
b
Nudging US Households to Save More
US households save little: The household saving rate, defined 
as the ratio of household saving to household disposable 
income, has averaged 6% since 2000, compared to, for 
example, 10% in Germany over the same period.
Successive governments have tried to increase the saving 
rate by giving tax breaks, which made saving more attractive, 
but with limited success. Considering the disappointing effects, 
Richard Thaler, an economist who is considered one of the 
fathers of the field of behavior economics and who received 
the Nobel Prize in 2017, suggested an alternative approach.
He argued that the reasons people saved little had little to 
do with interest rates or tax breaks, but much more with the 
way we actually behave. The evidence is that we do not make 
the right decisions, even judged from our own point of view.
First, we tend to ignore the future, or give it too little weight 
in making decisions. We suffer from something called hyper-
bolic discounting. Put simply, when presented with the choice 
of one apple today versus one apple next week, we strongly 
prefer the apple today. But when presented with the choice 
of one apple one week from now versus one apple in two 
weeks, we are nearly indifferent. This leads us to consume too 
much today. Second, we procrastinate, and leave decisions 
to tomorrow. A recent study finds that, as a result of these poor 
decisions, 43% of Americans run out of savings in retirement 
(and thus must rely on Social Security benefits only).
This led Richard Thaler and Shlomo Benartzi to design 
an approach called “Save More Tomorrow” aimed at dealing 
with these two issues. First, people were asked to make deci-
sions long before implementing them, so people would not 
have to increase saving and decrease consumption today but 
only commit to do it in the future, something psychologically 
much less costly. Second, and even more importantly, the sav-
ing plan option, rather than the no-saving plan option, was 
the default in the choice of plans. As a result, procrastina-
tion would lead people to choose by default the saving option. 
They would thus be “nudged” into saving, for their own good.
Has this approach worked? Quoting from the web site 
of Benartzi: “This ‘nudge’ has gone on to achieve massive 
scale. In 2006, it was enshrined in law as part of the Pension 
Protection Act of 2006, which encouraged companies to 
adopt the core principles of the program. According to the 
latest calculations, it’s estimated that ‘Save More Tomorrow’ 
has helped approximately 15 million Americans significantly 
boost their savings rate.”2
FOCUS
2Source: Used with permission, Shlomo benartzi. Retreived from: www.shlomobenartzi.com/save-more-tomorrow.


=== PAGE 37 ===
 
Chapter 11 
Saving, Capital Accumulation, and Output 
237
The level of output per worker depends on both the level of physical capital per 
worker, K/N, and the level of human capital per worker, H/N. As before, an increase in 
capital per worker K>N leads to an increase in output per worker. And an increase in the 
average level of skill H>N also leads to more output per worker. More skilled workers can 
do more complex tasks; they can deal more easily with unexpected complications. All of 
this leads to higher output per worker.
We assumed previously that increases in physical capital per worker increased 
output per worker, but that the effect became smaller as the level of capital per worker 
increased. We can make the same assumption for human capital per worker: Think of 
increases in H/N as coming from increases in the number of years of education. The evi-
dence is that the returns to increasing the proportion of children acquiring a primary 
education are large. At the very least, the ability to read and write allows people to use 
equipment that is more complicated and more productive. For rich countries, however, 
primary education—and, for that matter, secondary education—are no longer the rel-
evant margin. Most children now get both. The relevant margin is now higher educa-
tion. We are sure it will come as good news to you that the evidence shows that higher 
education increases people’s skills, at least as measured by the higher wages of those who 
acquire it. But to take an extreme example, it is not clear that forcing everyone to acquire 
an advanced college degree would increase aggregate output much. Many people would 
end up overqualified and probably more frustrated rather than more productive.
How should we construct the measure for human capital, H? The same way we con-
struct the measure for physical capital, K. To construct K, we just add the values of the 
different pieces of capital, so that a machine that costs $2,000 gets twice the weight of 
a machine that costs $1,000. Similarly, we construct the measure of H such that work-
ers who are paid twice as much get twice the weight. Take, for example, an economy 
with 100 workers, half of them unskilled and half of them skilled. Suppose the wage 
of the skilled workers is twice that of the unskilled workers. We can then construct H 
as 3(50 * 1) + (50 * 2)4 = 150. Human capital per worker, H/N, is then equal to 
150>100 = 1.5.
Human Capital, Physical Capital, and Output
How does the introduction of human capital change the analysis of the previous sections?
Our conclusions about physical capital accumulation remain valid. An increase in the 
saving rate increases steady-state physical capital per worker and therefore increases 
output per worker. But our conclusions now extend to human capital accumulation as well. 
An increase in how much society “saves” in the form of human capital—through educa-
tion and on-the-job training—increases steady-state human capital per worker, which 
leads to an increase in output per worker. Our extended model gives us a richer picture of 
how output per worker is determined. In the long run, it tells us that output per worker 
depends on both how much society saves and how much it spends on education.
What is the relative importance of human capital and of physical capital in the 
determination of output per worker? A place to start is to compare how much is spent on 
formal education to how much is invested in physical capital. In the United States, spend-
ing on formal education is about 6.5% of GDP. This number includes both government 
expenditures on education and people’s private expenditures on education. It is between 
one-third and one-half of the gross investment rate for physical capital (which is around 
17%). But this comparison is only a first pass. Consider the following complications:
 
■
Education, especially higher education, is partly consumption—done for its own 
sake—and partly investment. We should include only the investment part for our 
purposes, but the 6.5% number in the preceding paragraph includes both.
Note that we are using the 
same symbol, H, to denote 
central bank money in 
Chapter 4 and human capital 
in this chapter. Both uses 
are traditional. Do not be 
confused.
b
The rationale for using rela-
tive wages as weights is that 
they reflect relative marginal 
products. A worker who is 
paid three times as much as 
another is assumed to have 
a marginal product whose 
value is three times higher.
An issue, however, is 
whether relative wages accu-
rately reflect relative marginal 
products. To take a contro-
versial example, in the same 
job, with the same seniority, 
women still often earn less 
than men. Is it because their 
marginal product is lower? 
Should they be given a lower 
weight than men in the con-
struction of human capital?
b


=== PAGE 38 ===
238 
The Long Run 
The Core
 
■
At least for postsecondary education, the opportunity cost of a person’s education 
is his or her forgone wages while acquiring the education. Spending on education 
should include not only the actual cost of education but also this opportunity cost. 
The 6.5% number does not include this opportunity cost.
 
■
Formal education is only a part of education. Much of what we learn comes from on-
the-job training, formal or informal. Both the actual costs and the opportunity costs 
of on-the-job training should also be included. The 6.5% number does not include 
the costs associated with on-the-job training.
 
■
We should compare investment rates net of depreciation. Depreciation of physical 
capital, especially of machines, is likely to be higher than depreciation of human 
capital. Skills deteriorate, but slowly. And unlike physical capital, they deteriorate 
less quickly (or indeed improve) the more they are used.
For all these reasons, it is difficult to come up with reliable numbers for investment in 
human capital. Recent studies conclude that investment in physical capital and in educa-
tion play roughly similar roles in the determination of output. This implies that output 
per worker depends roughly equally on the amounts of physical capital and human capi-
tal in the economy. Countries that save more or spend more on education can achieve 
substantially higher steady-state levels of output per worker.
Endogenous Growth
Note what the conclusion we just reached did and did not say. It did say that a country 
that saves more or spends more on education will achieve a higher level of output per 
worker in steady state. It did not say that by saving or spending more on education a 
country can sustain permanently higher growth of output per worker.
However, following the lead of Robert Lucas and Paul Romer, researchers have 
explored the possibility that the joint accumulation of physical capital and human 
capital might actually be enough to sustain growth. Given human capital, increases in 
physical capital will run into decreasing returns. And given physical capital, increases in 
human capital will also run into decreasing returns. But these researchers have asked, 
what if both physical and human capital increase in tandem? Can’t an economy grow 
forever just by steadily having more capital and more skilled workers?
Models that generate steady growth even without technological progress are called 
models of endogenous growth—in contrast to the model we saw in previous sections 
of this chapter—the growth rate depends, even in the long run, on variables such as the 
saving rate and the rate of spending on education. The jury on this class of models is still 
out, but the indications so far are that the conclusions we drew earlier need to be quali-
fied and not abandoned. The current consensus is as follows:
 
■
Output per worker depends on the level of both physical capital per worker and 
human capital per worker. Both forms of capital can be accumulated, one through 
physical investment, the other through education and training. Increasing either the 
saving rate or the fraction of output spent on education and training can lead to 
much higher levels of output per worker in the long run. However, given the rate of 
technological progress, such measures do not lead to a permanently higher growth 
rate.
 
■
Note the qualifier in the last proposition: given the rate of technological progress. Is 
technological progress unrelated to the level of human capital in the economy? 
Can’t a better educated labor force lead to a higher rate of technological progress? 
These questions take us to the topic of the next chapter, the sources and effects of 
technological progress.
How large is your opportunity 
cost relative to your tuition?
b
Robert Lucas was awarded 
the Nobel Prize in 1995. He 
teaches at the University of 
Chicago. Paul Romer was 
awarded the Nobel Prize in 
2018. He teaches at New 
York University.
b


=== PAGE 39 ===
 
Chapter 11 
Saving, Capital Accumulation, and Output  
239
SUMMARY
 
■In the long run, the evolution of output is determined by 
two relations. (To make the reading of this summary easier, 
we shall omit “per worker” in what follows.) First, the level 
of output depends on the amount of capital. Second, capital 
accumulation depends on the level of output, which deter-
mines saving and investment.
 
■These interactions between capital and output imply that, 
starting from any level of capital (and ignoring technological 
progress, the topic of Chapter 12), an economy converges in the 
long run to a steady-state (constant) level of capital. Associated 
with this level of capital is a steady-state level of output.
 
■The steady-state level of capital, and thus the steady-state 
level of output, depends positively on the saving rate. A higher 
saving rate leads to a higher steady-state level of output; dur-
ing the transition to the new steady state, a higher saving rate 
leads to positive output growth. But (again ignoring techno-
logical progress) in the long run, the growth rate of output is 
equal to zero and so does not depend on the saving rate.
 
■An increase in the saving rate requires an initial decrease 
in consumption. In the long run, the increase in the saving 
rate may lead to an increase or a decrease in consumption, 
depending on whether the economy is below or above the 
golden-rule level of capital, which is the level of capital at 
which steady-state consumption is highest.
 
■Most countries have a level of capital below the golden-rule 
level. Thus, an increase in the saving rate leads to an initial 
decrease in consumption followed by an increase in con-
sumption in the long run. When considering whether to 
adopt policy measures aimed at changing a country’s sav-
ing rate, policymakers must decide how much weight to put 
on the welfare of current generations versus the welfare of 
future generations.
 
■Although most of the analysis of this chapter focuses 
on the effects of physical capital accumulation, output 
depends on the levels of both physical and human capital. 
Both forms of capital can be accumulated, one through 
investment, the other through education and training. 
Increasing the saving rate or the fraction of output spent 
on education and training can lead to large increases in 
output in the long run.
KEY TERMS
saving rate, 219
steady state, 225
golden-rule level of capital, 229
fully funded social security system, 231
pay-as-you-go social security system, 231
Social Security trust fund, 231
human capital, 236
models of endogenous growth, 238
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using the information in this chapter, label each of the following 
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. The saving rate is always equal to the investment rate.
b. A higher investment rate can sustain higher growth of 
output forever.
c. If capital never depreciated, growth could go on forever.
d. The higher the saving rate, the higher consumption in 
steady state.
e. We should transform Social Security from a pay-as-you-go 
system to a fully funded system. This would increase con-
sumption both now and in the future.
f. The US government should give tax breaks for saving because 
the US capital stock is far below the golden-rule level.
g. Education increases human capital and thus output. It fol-
lows that governments should subsidize education.
2. Consider the following statement: “The Solow model shows that 
the saving rate does not affect the growth rate in the long run, so we 
should stop worrying about the low US saving rate. Increasing the 
saving rate wouldn’t have any important effects on the economy.” 
Explain why you agree or disagree with this statement?
3. In Chapter 3 we saw that an increase in the saving rate can lead 
to a recession in the short run (i.e., the paradox of saving). We 
examined the issue in the medium run in Problem 5 at the end of 
Chapter 7. We can now examine the long-run effects of an increase 
in saving.
Using the model presented in this chapter, what is the effect of 
an increase in the saving rate on output per worker likely to be after 
one decade? After five decades?
DIG DEEPER
4. Discuss how the level of output per person in the long run would 
likely be affected by each of the following changes:
a. The right to exclude saving from income when paying 
income taxes.
b. A higher rate of female participation in the labor market 
(but constant population).
5. Suppose the United States moved from the current pay-as-you-go 
Social Security system to a fully funded one and financed the tran-
sition without additional government borrowing. How would the 
shift to a fully funded system affect the level and the rate of growth 
of output per worker in the long run?


=== PAGE 40 ===
240 
The Long Run 
The Core
6. Suppose that the production function is given by
Y = 0.52K2N
a. Derive the steady-state levels of output per worker and 
capital per worker in terms of the saving rate, s, and the 
depreciation rate, d.
b. Derive the equation for steady-state output per worker and 
steady-state consumption per worker in terms of s and d.
c. Suppose that d = 0.05. With your favorite spread-
sheet 
software, 
compute 
steady-state 
output 
per 
worker and steady-state consumption per worker when 
s = 0.2; s = 1. Explain the intuition behind your results.
d. Use your favorite spreadsheet software to graph the steady-
state level of output per worker and the steady-state level 
of consumption per worker as a function of the saving rate 
(i.e., measure the saving rate on the horizontal axis of your 
graph and the corresponding values of output per worker 
and consumption per worker on the vertical axis).
e. Does the graph show that there is a value of s that maxi-
mizes output per worker? Does the graph show that there is 
a value of s that maximizes consumption per worker? If so, 
what is this value?
7. The Cobb-Douglas production function and the steady state.
This problem is based on the material in the chapter appendix. 
Suppose that the economy’s production function is given by
Y = KaN1 - a
and assume that a = 1>3
a. Is this production function characterized by constant 
returns to scale? Explain.
b. Are there decreasing returns to capital?
c. Are there decreasing returns to labor?
d. Transform the production function into a relation between 
output per worker and capital per worker.
e. For a given saving rate, s, and depreciation rate, d, give an 
expression for capital per worker in the steady state.
f. Give an expression for output per worker in the steady 
state.
g. Solve for the steady-state level of output per worker when 
s = 0.32 and d = 0.08.
h. Suppose that the depreciation rate remains constant at 
d = 0.08, while the saving rate is reduced by half, to 
s = 0.16. What is the new steady-state output per worker?
8. Continuing with the logic from Problem 7, suppose that the 
economy’s production function is given by Y = K1>3N2>3 and that 
the saving rate, s, and the depreciation rate, d are equal to 0.10.
a. What is the steady-state level of capital per worker?
b. What is the steady-state level of output per worker?
Suppose that the economy is in steady state and that, in 
period t, the depreciation rate increases permanently from 0.10 
to 0.20.
c. What will be the new steady-state levels of capital per 
worker and output per worker?
d. Compute the path of capital per worker and output per 
worker over the first three periods after the change in the 
depreciation rate.
9. Deficits and the capital stock
For the production function, Y = 2K2N equation (11.9) 
gives the solution for the steady-state capital stock per worker.
a. Retrace the steps in the text that derive equation (11.9).
b. Suppose that the saving rate, s, is initially 15% per year, 
and the depreciation rate, d, is 7.5%. What is the steady-
state capital stock per worker? What is steady-state output 
per worker?
c. Suppose that there is a government deficit of 5% of GDP 
and that the government eliminates this deficit. Assume 
that private saving is unchanged so that total saving 
increases to 20%. What is the new steady-state capital 
stock per worker? What is the new steady-state output per 
worker? How does this compare to your answer to part b?
EXPLORE FURTHER
10. US saving and government deficits 
This question continues the logic of Problem 9 to explore the 
implications of the US government budget deficit for the long-run 
capital stock. The question assumes that the United States will have 
a budget deficit over the life of this edition of the text.
a. The World Bank reports gross domestic saving rate by 
country and year. The Web site is https://data.worldbank.
org/indicator/NY.GNS.ICTR.ZS. Find the most recent num-
ber for the United States. What is the total saving rate in 
the United States as a percentage of GDP? Using the depre-
ciation rate and the logic from Problem 9, what would be 
the steady-state capital stock per worker? What would be 
steady-state output per worker?
b. Go to the most recent Economic Report of the President 
(ERP) and find the most recent federal deficit as a percent-
age of GDP. In the 2018 ERP, this is found in Table B-18. 
Using the reasoning from Problem 9, suppose that the fed-
eral budget deficit was eliminated and there was no change 
in private saving. What would be the effect on the long-run 
capital stock per worker? What would be the effect on long-
run output per worker?
c. Return to the World Bank table of gross domestic saving 
rates. How does the saving rate in China compare to the 
saving rate in the United States?
FURTHER READINGS
 
■The classic treatment of the relation between the saving 
rate and output is by Robert Solow, Growth Theory: An 
Exposition (1970).
 
■An easy-to-read discussion of whether and how to increase 
saving and improve education in the United States is 
given in Memoranda 23 to 27 in Memos to the President: A 
Guide through Macroeconomics for the Busy Policymaker, by 
Charles Schultze, who was the Chairman of the Council 
of Economic Advisers during the Carter administration 
(1992).


=== PAGE 41 ===
 
Chapter 11 
Saving, Capital Accumulation, and Output 
241
APPENDIX: The Cobb-Douglas Production Function  
and the Steady State
In 1928, Charles Cobb (a mathematician) and Paul Douglas 
(an economist, who went on to become a US senator) concluded 
that the following production function gave a good description 
of the relation between output, physical capital, and labor in the 
United States from 1899 to 1922:
 
Y = KaN1 - a 
(11.A1)
with a being a number between zero and one. Their findings proved 
surprisingly robust. Even today, the production function (11.
A1), now known as the Cobb-Douglas production function, 
still gives a good description of the relation between output, capital, 
and labor in the United States, and it has become a standard tool in 
the economist’s toolbox. (Verify for yourself that it satisfies the two 
properties we discussed in the text: constant returns to scale and 
decreasing returns to capital and to labor.)
The purpose of this appendix is to characterize the steady 
state of an economy when the production function is given by 
(11.A1). (All you need to follow the steps is knowledge of the 
properties of exponents.)
Recall that, in steady state, saving per worker must be 
equal to depreciation per worker. Let’s see what this implies.
 
■To derive saving per worker, we must first derive the relation 
between output per worker and capital per worker implied by 
equation (11.A1). Divide both sides of equation (11.A1) by N:
Y>N = KaN1 - a>N
Using the properties of exponents,
N1 - a>N = N1 - aN -1 = N -a
so replacing the terms in N in the preceding equation, we get:
Y>N = KaN -a = 1K>N2a
Output per worker, Y/N, is equal to the ratio of capital 
per worker, K/N, raised to the power a.
Saving per worker is equal to the saving rate times out-
put per worker, so, using the previous equation, it is equal to
s1K*>N2a
 
■Depreciation per worker is equal to the depreciation rate 
times capital per worker:
d1K*>N2
 
■The steady-state level of capital, K*, is determined by the 
condition that saving per worker be equal to depreciation 
per worker, so:
s1K*>N2a = d1K*>N2
To solve this expression for the steady-state level of capital 
per worker K*>N, divide both sides by 1K*>N2a:
s = d1K*>N21 - a
Divide both sides by d, and change the order of the equality:
1K*>N21 - a = s>d
Finally, raise both sides to the power 1>11 - a2 :
1K*>N2 = 1s>d21>11 - a2
This gives us the steady-state level of capital per worker.
From the production function, the steady-state level of out-
put per worker is then equal to
1Y*>N2 = (K>N)a = 1s>d2a>11 - a2
Let’s see what this last equation implies.
 
■In the text, we worked with a special case of an equation 
(11.A1), the case where a = 0.5. (Taking a variable to the 
power 0.5 is the same as taking the square root of the vari-
able.) If a = 0.5, the preceding equation means
Y*>N = s>d
Output per worker is equal to the ratio of the saving 
rate to the depreciation rate. This is the equation we dis-
cussed in the text. A doubling of the saving rate leads to a 
doubling in steady-state output per worker.
 
■The empirical evidence suggests, however, that, if 
we think of K as physical capital, a is closer to one-
third than to one-half. Assuming a = 1>3, then 
a11 - a2 = 11>32>11 - 11>322 = 11>32>12>32 = 1>2 , 
and the equation for output per worker yields
Y*>N = 1s>d21>2 = 2s>d
This implies smaller effects of the saving rate on 
output per worker than was suggested by the computa-
tions in the text. A doubling of the saving rate, for example, 
means that output per worker increases by a factor of 22 
or only about 1.4.
 
■There is, however, an interpretation of our model in which 
the appropriate value of a is close to 1/2, so the com-
putations in the text are applicable. If, along the lines of 
Section 11-4, we take human capital into account as well 
as physical capital, then a value of a around 1/2 for the 
contribution of this broader definition of capital to output 
is, indeed, roughly appropriate. Thus, one interpretation 
of the numerical results in Section 11-3 is that they show 
the effects of a given saving rate, but that saving must be 
interpreted to include saving in both physical capital and in 
human capital (more machines and more education).
Key Term
Cobb-Douglas production function, 241


=== PAGE 42 ===
This page is intentionally left blank


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 42 ===
This page is intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 43 ===
243
Technological 
Progress and 
Growth
T
he conclusion in Chapter 11 that capital accumulation cannot by itself sustain growth 
has a straightforward implication: Sustained growth requires technological progress. 
This chapter looks at the role of technological progress in growth.
Section 12-1 looks at the roles of technological progress and capital accumulation in 
growth.
Section 12-2 turns to the determinants of technological progress, the role of research 
and development (R&D), and the role of innovation versus imitation.
Section 12-3 discusses why some countries are able to achieve steady technological 
progress while others do not. In so doing, it looks at the role of institutions in sustaining 
growth.
12
If you remember one basic message from this chapter, it should be: Sustained 
growth requires sustained technological progress. Technological progress depends 
both on innovation and on institutions. 


=== PAGE 44 ===
244 
The Long Run 
The Core
12-1  TECHNOLOGICAL PROGRESS AND 
THE RATE OF GROWTH
In an economy in which there is both capital accumulation and technological progress, 
at what rate will output grow? To answer this question, we need to extend the model 
developed in Chapter 11 to allow for technological progress. To do so, we must first revisit 
the aggregate production function.
Technological Progress and the Production Function
Technological progress has many dimensions:
 
■
It can lead to larger quantities of output for given quantities of capital and labor. 
Think of a new type of lubricant that allows a machine to run at a higher speed and 
to increase production.
 
■
It can lead to better products. Think of the steady improvement over time in automo-
bile safety and comfort.
 
■
It can lead to new products. Think of the introduction of the iPad, wireless commu-
nication technology, flat screen monitors, and self-driving cars.
 
■
It can lead to a larger variety of products. Think of the steady increase in the number 
of breakfast cereals available at your local supermarket.
These dimensions are more similar than they appear. If we think of consumers 
as caring not about the goods themselves but about the services these goods provide, 
then they all have something in common: In each case, consumers receive more ser-
vices. A better car provides more safety, a new product such as an iPad or faster com-
munication technology provides more communication services, and so on. If we think 
of output as the underlying services provided by the goods produced in the economy, 
we can think of technological progress as leading to increases in output for given 
amounts of capital and labor. We can then think of the state of technology as a vari-
able that tells us how much output can be produced from given amounts of capital 
and labor at any time. If we denote the state of technology by A, we can rewrite the 
production function as
Y = F 1K, N, A2
 1+,+,+2
This is our extended production function. Output depends on both capital and labor 
(K and N) and on the state of technology (A). Given capital and labor, an improvement in 
the state of technology, A, leads to an increase in output.
It will be convenient to use a more restrictive form of the preceding equation, namely
 
Y = F1K, AN2 
(12.1)
This equation states that production depends on capital and on labor multiplied by 
the state of technology. Introducing the state of technology in this way makes it easier to 
think about the effect of technological progress on the relation between output, capital, 
and labor. Equation (12.1) implies that we can think of technological progress in two 
equivalent ways:
 
■
Technological progress reduces the number of workers needed to produce a given 
amount of output. If A doubles, firms can produce the same quantity of output with 
only half the original number of workers, N.
 
■
Technological progress increases the output that can be produced with a given 
number of workers. We can think of AN as the amount of effective labor in the 
The average number of items 
carried by a supermarket 
increased from 2,200 in 1950 
to 38,700 in 2010. To get a 
sense of what this means, 
see Robin Williams (who 
plays an immigrant from the 
Soviet Union) in the super-
market scene in the movie 
Moscow on the Hudson. c
As you saw in the Focus Box 
“Real GDP, Technological 
Progress, and the Price of 
Computers” in Chapter 2, 
thinking of products as 
 providing a number of 
 underlying services is the 
method used to construct the 
price index for computers.
c
 For simplicity, we shall 
ignore human capital here. 
We return to it later in the 
chapter. c


=== PAGE 45 ===
 
Chapter 12 
Technological Progress and Growth 
245
economy. If the state of technology A doubles, it is as if the economy had twice as 
many workers. In other words, we can think of output being produced by two fac-
tors: capital 1K2, and effective labor 1AN2.
What restrictions should we impose on the extended production function (12.1)? We 
can build directly here on our discussion in Chapter 11.
Again, it is reasonable to assume constant returns to scale. For a given state of technol-
ogy 1A2, doubling both the amount of capital 1K2 and the amount of labor 1N2 is likely 
to lead to a doubling of output
F12K, 2AN2 = 2Y
More generally, for any number x,
F1x K, x AN2 = xY
It is also reasonable to assume decreasing returns to each of the two factors—capital 
and effective labor. Given effective labor, an increase in capital is likely to increase output 
but at a decreasing rate. Symmetrically, given capital, an increase in effective labor is 
likely to increase output, but at a decreasing rate.
It was convenient in Chapter 11 to think in terms of output per worker and capital 
per worker. That was because the steady state of the economy was a state where output 
per worker and capital per worker were constant. It is convenient here to look at output per 
effective worker and capital per effective worker. The reason is the same; as we shall soon 
see, in steady state, output per effective worker and capital per effective worker are constant.
To get a relation between output per effective worker and capital per effective worker, 
take x = 1>AN in the preceding equation. This gives
Y
AN = F a K
AN, 1b
Or, if we define the function f so that f 1K>AN2 = F1K>AN, 12 :
 
Y
AN = f a K
AN b 
(12.2)
In words: Output per effective worker (the left side) is a function of capital per effective 
worker (the expression in the function on the right side).
The relation between output per effective worker and capital per effective worker is 
drawn in Figure 12-1. It looks much the same as the relation we drew in Figure 11–2 
AN is also sometimes called 
labor in efficiency units. 
The use of efficiency for 
“efficiency units” here and for 
“efficiency wages” in Chapter 
6 is a coincidence; the two 
notions are unrelated.
b
Per worker: divided by the 
number of workers (N). Per 
effective worker: divided 
by the number of effective 
workers (AN)—the number of 
workers, N, times the state of 
technology, A.
b
Capital per effective worker, K/AN
Output per effective worker, Y/AN
f(K/AN)
Figure 12-1
Output per Effective 
Worker versus Capital 
per Effective Worker
Because of decreasing returns 
to capital, increases in capital 
per effective worker lead to 
smaller and smaller increases 
in output per effective worker.
Suppose that F has the 
double square root form:
Y = F1K,  AN2 = 2K2AN
Then
Y
AN = 2K2AN
AN
=
2K
2AN
So, in this case, the function f  
is simply the square root 
function:
f a K
ANb = A
K
AN
b


=== PAGE 46 ===
246 
The Long Run 
The Core
between output per worker and capital per worker in the absence of technological prog-
ress. There, increases in K>N led to increases in Y>N, but at a decreasing rate. Here, 
increases in K>AN lead to increases in Y>AN, but at a decreasing rate.
Interactions between Output and Capital
We now have the elements we need to think about the determinants of growth. Our anal-
ysis will parallel the analysis of Chapter 11. There we looked at the dynamics of output per 
worker and capital per worker. Here we look at the dynamics of output per effective worker 
and capital per effective worker.
In Chapter 11, we characterized the dynamics of output and capital per worker 
using Figure 11–2, where we drew three relations:
 
■
The relation between output per worker and capital per worker.
 
■
The relation between investment per worker and capital per worker.
 
■
The relation between depreciation per worker—equivalently, the investment per 
worker needed to maintain a constant level of capital per worker—and capital per 
worker.
The dynamics of capital per worker and, by implication, output per worker, were 
determined by the relation between investment per worker and depreciation per worker. 
Depending on whether investment per worker was greater or smaller than depreciation 
per worker, capital per worker increased or decreased over time, as did output per worker.
We shall follow the same approach in building Figure 12-2. The difference is that we 
focus on output, capital, and investment per effective worker rather than per worker.
 
■
The relation between output per effective worker and capital per effective worker was 
derived in Figure 12-1. This relation is repeated in Figure 12-2; output per effective 
worker increases with capital per effective worker, but at a decreasing rate.
 
■
Under the same assumptions as in Chapter 11—that investment is equal to private 
saving, and the private saving rate is constant—investment is given by
I = S = s Y
Divide both sides by the number of effective workers, AN, to get
I
AN = s Y
AN
 A simple key to 
 understanding the results 
in this section: The results 
we derived for output per 
worker in Chapter 11 still 
hold in this chapter, but 
now for output per  effective 
worker. For example, in 
Chapter 11, we saw that 
output per worker was 
 constant in steady state. In 
this chapter, we shall see 
that output per effective 
worker is constant in steady 
state. And so on.
c
Output per effective worker, Y/AN
Output
f(K/AN)
Required investment
(   1 gA 1 gN) K/AN
Investment
sf(K/AN)
Capital per effective worker, K/AN
(K/AN)0
(K/AN)*
A
D
C
B
Y
(AN)*
Figure 12-2
The Dynamics of Capital 
per Effective Worker 
and Output per Effective 
Worker
Capital per effective worker 
and output per effective 
worker converge to constant 
values in the long run.


=== PAGE 47 ===
 
Chapter 12 
Technological Progress and Growth 
247
Replacing output per effective worker, Y/AN, by its expression from equation (12.2) 
gives
I
AN = s f a K
AN b
The relation between investment per effective worker and capital per effective worker 
is drawn in Figure 12-2. It is equal to the upper curve—the relation between output 
per effective worker and capital per effective worker—multiplied by the saving rate, s. 
This gives us the lower curve.
 
■
Finally, we need to ask what level of investment per effective worker is needed to 
maintain a given level of capital per effective worker.
In Chapter 11, the answer was: For capital to be constant, investment had to be 
equal to the depreciation of the existing capital stock. Here, the answer is slightly 
more complicated. The reason is as follows: Now that we allow for technological 
progress (so A increases over time), the number of effective workers 1AN2 increases 
over time. Thus, maintaining the same ratio of capital to effective workers 1K>AN2 
requires an increase in the capital stock 1K2 proportional to the increase in the num-
ber of effective workers 1AN2.  Let’s look at this condition more closely.
Let d be the depreciation rate of capital. Let the rate of technological progress 
be equal to gA. Let the rate of population growth be equal to gN. If we assume that 
the ratio of employment to the total population remains constant, the number of 
workers 1N2 also grows at annual rate gN. Together, these assumptions imply that 
the growth rate of effective labor 1AN2 equals gA + gN. For example, if the number 
of workers is growing at 1% per year and the rate of technological progress is 2% per 
year, then the growth rate of effective labor is equal to 3% per year.
These assumptions imply that the level of investment needed to maintain a 
given level of capital per effective worker is therefore given by
I = dK + 1gA + gN2K
Or, equivalently,
 
I = 1d + gA + gN2K 
(12.3)
An amount dK is needed just to keep the capital stock constant. If the depre-
ciation rate is 10%, then investment must be equal to 10% of the capital stock to 
maintain the same level of capital. And an additional amount 1gA + gN2 K is needed 
to ensure that the capital stock increases at the same rate as effective labor. If effec-
tive labor increases at 3% per year, for example, then capital must increase by 3% 
per year to maintain the same level of capital per effective worker. Putting dK and 
1gA + gN2 K together in this example: If the depreciation rate is 10% and the growth 
rate of effective labor is 3%, then investment must equal 13% of the capital stock to 
maintain a constant level of capital per effective worker.
Dividing the previous expression by the number of effective workers to get the 
amount of investment per effective worker needed to maintain a constant level of 
capital per effective worker gives
I
AN = 1d + gA + gN2 K
AN
The level of investment per effective worker needed to maintain a given level 
of capital per effective worker is represented by the upward-sloping line “Required 
investment” in Figure 12-2. The slope of the line equals 1d + gA + gN2.
In Chapter 11, we assumed 
gA = 0 and gN = 0. Our 
focus in this chapter is 
on the implications of 
 technological progress, 
gA 7 0. Once we allow for 
 technological  progress, 
introducing  population 
growth gN 7 0 is straight-
forward. Thus, we allow for 
both gA 7 0 and gN 7 0.
b
The growth rate of the 
product of two variables is 
the sum of the growth rates 
of the two variables. See 
Proposition 7 in Appendix 2 
at the end of the book.
b


=== PAGE 48 ===
248 
The Long Run 
The Core
Dynamics of Capital and Output
We can now give a graphical description of the dynamics of capital per effective worker 
and output per effective worker.
Consider a given level of capital per effective worker, say 1K>AN20 in Figure 12-2. 
At that level, output per effective worker equals the vertical distance AB. Investment 
per effective worker is equal to AC. The amount of investment required to maintain that 
level of capital per effective worker is equal to AD. Because actual investment exceeds the 
investment level required to maintain the existing level of capital per effective worker, 
K/AN increases.
Hence, starting from 1K>AN20, the economy moves to the right, with the level of 
capital per effective worker increasing over time. This goes on until investment per effec-
tive worker is just sufficient to maintain the existing level of capital per effective worker, 
until capital per effective worker equals 1K>AN2*.
In the long run, capital per effective worker reaches a constant level, and so does out-
put per effective worker. Put another way, the steady state of this economy is such that 
capital per effective worker and output per effective worker are constant and equal to 1K>AN)* 
and 1Y>AN2*, respectively.
This implies that, in steady state, output 1Y2 is growing at the same rate as effec-
tive labor 1AN2, so that the ratio of the two is constant. Because effective labor grows at 
rate 1gA + gN2, output growth in steady state must also equal 1gA + gN2. The same rea-
soning applies to capital. Because capital per effective worker is constant in steady state, 
capital is also growing at rate 1gA + gN2.
Stated in terms of capital or output per effective worker, these results seem rather 
abstract. But it is straightforward to state them in a more intuitive way, and this gives us 
our first important conclusion:
In steady state, the growth rate of output equals the rate of population growth 1gN2 plus 
the rate of technological progress 1gA2. By implication, the growth rate of output is independent 
of the saving rate.
To strengthen your intuition, let’s go back to the argument we used in Chapter 11 to 
show that, in the absence of technological progress and population growth, the economy 
could not sustain positive growth forever.
 
■
The argument went as follows: Suppose the economy tried to sustain positive output 
growth. Because of decreasing returns to capital, capital would have to grow faster 
than output. The economy would have to devote a larger and larger proportion of 
output to capital accumulation. At some point there would be no more output to 
devote to capital accumulation. Growth would come to an end.
 
■
Exactly the same logic is at work here. Effective labor grows at rate 1gA + gN2. 
Suppose the economy tried to sustain output growth in excess of 1gA + gN2. Because 
of decreasing returns to capital, capital would have to increase faster than output. 
The economy would have to devote a larger and larger proportion of output to cap-
ital accumulation. At some point this would prove impossible. Thus, the economy 
cannot permanently grow faster than 1gA + gN2.
We have focused on the behavior of aggregate output. To get a sense of what hap-
pens not to aggregate output but rather to the standard of living over time, we must look 
instead at the behavior of output per worker (not output per effective worker). Because 
output grows at rate 1gA + gN2 and the number of workers grows at rate gN, output per 
worker grows at rate gA. In other words, when the economy is in steady state, output per 
worker grows at the rate of technological progress.
Because output, capital, and effective labor all grow at the same rate 1gA + gN2 in 
steady state, the steady state of this economy is also called a state of balanced growth. 
 If Y/AN is constant, Y must 
grow at the same rate as 
AN. So, it must grow at rate 
gA + gN. c
 The growth rate of Y/N is 
equal to the growth rate 
of Y minus the growth rate 
of N (see Proposition 8 in 
Appendix 2 at the end of the 
book). So the growth rate of 
Y>N is given by 
1gY - gN2 =
1gA + gN2 - gN =
gA.
c


=== PAGE 49 ===
 
Chapter 12 
Technological Progress and Growth 
249
In steady state, output and the two inputs, capital and effective labor, grow “in balance” 
at the same rate. The characteristics of balanced growth will be helpful later in the chap-
ter and are summarized in Table 12-1.
On the balanced growth path (equivalently: in steady state; equivalently: in the long 
run):
 
■
Capital per effective worker and output per effective worker are constant; this is the result 
we derived in Figure 12-2.
 
■
Equivalently, capital per worker and output per worker are growing at the rate of tech-
nological progress, gA.
 
■
Or in terms of labor, capital, and output: Labor is growing at the rate of population 
growth, gN; capital and output are growing at a rate equal to the sum of population 
growth and the rate of technological progress, 1gA + gN2.
Back to the Effects of the Saving Rate
In steady state, the growth rate of output depends only on the rate of population growth 
and the rate of technological progress. Changes in the saving rate do not affect the 
steady-state growth rate. But changes in the saving rate do increase the steady-state level 
of output per effective worker.
This result is best seen in Figure 12-3, which shows the effect of an increase in the 
saving rate from s0 to s1. The increase in the saving rate shifts the investment relation 
up, from s0  f1K>AN2 to s1 f1K>AN2. It follows that the steady-state level of capital per 
Capital per effective worker, K/AN
(K/AN)0
(K/AN)1
Output per effective worker, Y/AN
s1f(K/AN)
s0f(K/AN)
f(K/AN)
(   1 gA 1 gN)K/AN
Y
(AN)
1
Y
(AN)
0
Figure 12-3
The Effects of an Increase 
in the Saving Rate: I
An increase in the saving rate 
leads to an increase in the 
steady-state levels of out-
put per effective worker and 
capital per effective worker.
Table 12-1 
The Characteristics of Balanced Growth
Growth Rate
1
Capital per effective worker
0
2
Output per effective worker
0
3
Capital per worker
gA
4
Output per worker
gA
5
Labor
gN
6
Capital
gA + gN
7
Output
gA + gN


=== PAGE 50 ===
250 
The Long Run 
The Core
effective worker increases from 1K>AN20 to 1K>AN21, with a corresponding increase in 
the level of output per effective worker from 1Y>AN20 to 1Y>AN21.
Following the increase in the saving rate, capital per effective worker and output 
per effective worker increase for some time as they converge to their new higher level. 
Figure  12-4 plots output against time. Output is measured on a logarithmic scale. 
The economy is initially on the balanced growth path AA: Output is growing at rate 
1gA + gN2—so the slope of AA is equal to 1gA + gN2. After the increase in the saving 
rate at time t, output grows faster for some period of time. Eventually, output ends up at 
a higher level than it would have been without the increase in saving. But its growth rate 
returns to gA + gN. In the new steady state, the economy grows at the same rate, but on a 
higher growth path, BB, which is parallel to AA and also has a slope equal to 1gA + gN2.
Let’s summarize: In an economy with technological progress and population growth, 
output grows over time. In steady state, output per effective worker and capital per effective 
worker are constant. Put another way, output per worker and capital per worker grow at 
the rate of technological progress. Put yet another way, output and capital grow at the 
same rate as effective labor, and therefore at a rate equal to the growth rate of the num-
ber of workers plus the rate of technological progress. When the economy is in steady 
state, it is said to be on a balanced growth path.
The rate of output growth in steady state is independent of the saving rate. However, 
the saving rate affects the steady-state level of output per effective worker. And increases 
in the saving rate lead, for some time, to an increase in the growth rate above the steady-
state growth rate.
12-2 THE DETERMINANTS OF 
TECHNOLOGICAL PROGRESS
We have just seen that the growth rate of output per worker is ultimately determined by the 
rate of technological progress. This leads naturally to the next question: What determines the 
rate of technological progress? This is the question we take up in this and the next sections.
The term technological progress brings to mind images of major discoveries—the 
invention of the microchip, the discovery of the structure of DNA, and so on. These 
discoveries suggest a process driven largely by scientific research and chance rather 
than by economic forces. But the truth is that most technological progress in modern 
advanced economies is the result of a humdrum process: the outcome of firms’ research 
and development (R&D) activities. Industrial R&D expenditures account for between 
 Figure 12-4 is the same as 
Figure 11-5, which anticipated 
the derivation presented here. c
 For a description of loga-
rithmic scales, see Appendix 
2 at the end of the book. 
When a logarithmic scale is 
used, a variable growing at 
a constant rate moves along 
a straight line. The slope of 
the line is equal to the rate of 
growth of the variable.
c
Time
t
A
B
A
B
Output, Y (log scale)
Output associated with s1 > s0
Slope (gA 1 gN)
Output associated with s0
Figure 12-4
The Effects of an Increase 
in the Saving Rate: II
The increase in the saving 
rate leads to higher growth 
until the economy reaches its 
new, higher, balanced growth 
path.


=== PAGE 51 ===
 
Chapter 12 
Technological Progress and Growth 
251
2% and 3% of GDP in each of the four major rich countries we looked at in Chapter 10 
(the United States, France, Japan, and the United Kingdom). About 75% of the roughly 
one million US scientists and researchers working in R&D are employed by firms. US 
firms’ R&D spending equals more than 20% of their spending on gross investment, and 
more than 60% of their spending on net investment—gross investment less depreciation.
Firms spend on R&D for the same reason they buy new machines or build new plants: 
to increase profits. By increasing spending on R&D, a firm increases the probability that it 
will discover and develop a new product. (We shall use product as a generic term to denote 
new goods or new techniques of production.) If the new product is successful, the firm’s 
profits will increase. There is, however, an important difference between purchasing a 
machine and spending more on R&D. The difference is that the outcome of R&D is fun-
damentally ideas. And unlike a machine, an idea can potentially be used by many firms at 
the same time. A firm that has just acquired a new machine does not have to worry that 
another firm will use that particular machine. A firm that has discovered and developed 
a new product can make no such assumption.
This last point implies that the level of R&D spending depends not only on the fertility 
of research—how spending on R&D translates into new ideas and new products—but 
also on the appropriability of research results, which is the extent to which firms can 
benefit from the results of their own R&D. Let’s look at each aspect in turn.
The Fertility of the Research Process
If research is fertile—that is, if R&D spending leads to many new products—then, other 
things being equal, firms will have strong incentives to spend on R&D: R&D spending 
and, by implication, technological progress will be high. The determinants of the fertility 
of research lie largely outside the realm of economics. Many factors interact here.
The fertility of research depends on the successful interaction between basic research 
(the search for general principles and results) and applied research and development (the 
application of these results to specific uses, and the development of new products). Basic 
research does not by itself lead to technological progress. But the success of applied R&D 
depends ultimately on basic research. Much of the computer industry’s development can 
be traced to a few breakthroughs, from the invention of the transistor to the invention of 
the microchip. On the software side, much of the progress comes from progress in math-
ematics. For example, progress in encryption comes from progress in the theory of prime 
numbers.
Some countries appear more successful at basic research; other countries are more 
successful at applied research and development. Studies point to differences in the edu-
cation system as one of the reasons why. For example, it is often argued that the French 
higher education system, with its strong emphasis on abstract thinking, produces 
researchers who are better at basic research than at applied research. Studies also point 
to the importance of a “culture of entrepreneurship,” in which a big part of technologi-
cal progress comes from the ability of entrepreneurs to organize the successful develop-
ment and marketing of new products—a dimension in which the United States appears 
better than most other countries.
It takes many years, and often many decades, for the full potential of major discover-
ies to be realized. The usual sequence is one in which a major discovery leads to the explo-
ration of potential applications, then to the development of new products, and finally to 
the adoption of these new products. The Focus Box “The Diffusion of New Technology: 
Hybrid Corn” shows the results of one of the first studies of this process of the diffusion 
of ideas. Closer to us is the example of personal computers: 40 years after the commer-
cial introduction of personal computers (Apple I was introduced in 1976), it often seems 
as if we have just begun discovering their uses.
 In Chapter 11, we looked 
at the role of human capital 
as an input in production. 
People with more educa-
tion can use more complex 
machines or handle more 
complex tasks. Here, we see 
a second role for human cap-
ital: better researchers and 
scientists and, by implication, 
a higher rate of technological 
progress.
b


=== PAGE 52 ===
252 
The Long Run 
The Core
An age-old worry is that research will become less and less fertile, that most major 
discoveries have already taken place and that technological progress will begin to slow 
down. This fear may come from thinking about mining, where higher-grade mines were 
exploited first, and where we have had to exploit increasingly lower-grade mines. But this 
is only an analogy, and so far there is no evidence that it is correct.
The Appropriability of Research Results
The second determinant of the level of R&D and of technological progress is the degree 
of appropriability of research results. If firms cannot appropriate the profits from the 
development of new products, they will not engage in R&D and technological progress 
will be slow. Many factors are also at work here.
The nature of the research process itself is important. For example, if it is widely 
believed that the discovery of a new product by one firm will quickly lead to the discovery 
The Diffusion of New Technology: Hybrid Corn
New technologies are not developed or adopted overnight. 
One of the first studies of the diffusion of new technologies 
was carried out in 1957 by Zvi Griliches, a Harvard econo-
mist, who looked at the diffusion of hybrid corn in different 
states in the United States.
Hybrid corn was, in the words of Griliches, “the invention 
of a method of inventing.” Producing hybrid corn entails 
crossing different strains of corn to develop a type of corn 
adapted to local conditions. The introduction of hybrid corn 
can increase the corn yield by up to 20%.
Although the idea of hybridization was developed at the 
beginning of the 20th century, commercial application did 
not take place until the 1930s in the United States. Figure 1 
shows the rate at which hybrid corn was adopted in selected 
states from 1932 to 1956.
The figure shows two dynamic processes at work. One is the 
process through which hybrid corns appropriate to each state 
were discovered. Hybrid corn became available in southern states 
(Texas and Alabama) more than 10 years after it had become 
available in northern states (Iowa, Wisconsin, and Kentucky). 
The other is the speed at which hybrid corn was adopted in each 
state. Within 8 years of its introduction, practically all corn 
in Iowa was hybrid corn. The process was much slower in the 
South. More than 10 years after its introduction, hybrid corn 
accounted for only 60% of total acreage in Alabama.
Why was the speed of  adoption higher in the North than 
in the South? Griliches’s article showed that the reason was 
economic: The speed of  adoption in each state was a func-
tion of  the profitability of  introducing hybrid corn: profit-
ability was higher in Iowa than in the southern states.1
FOCUS
Percent of total acreage
100
80
60
40
20
10
0
1932
1934
1936
1938
1940
1942
1944
1946
1948
1950
1952
1954
1956
Iowa
Wisconsin
Kentucky
Texas
Alabama
Figure 1
Percentage of Total Corn Acreage Planted with Hybrid Seed, Selected US States, 1932–1956
1Source: Zvi Griliches, “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological Change,” Econometrica, 1957, Vol 
25, No. 4, pp. 501–522. A number of very nice graphs of other examples technology adoption are available at https://
ourworldindata.org/technology-adoption. Used with Permission.


=== PAGE 53 ===
 
Chapter 12 
Technological Progress and Growth 
253
of an even better product by another firm, there may be little advantage to being first. 
In other words, a highly fertile field of research may not generate high levels of R&D 
because no company will find the investment worthwhile. This example is extreme, but 
revealing.
Even more important is the legal protection given to new products. Without such 
legal protection, profits from the development of a new product are likely to be small. 
Except in rare cases where the product is based on a trade secret (such as Coca Cola), it 
will generally not take long for other firms to produce the same product, eliminating any 
advantage the innovating firm may have initially had. This is why countries have patent 
laws. Patents give a firm that has discovered a new product—usually a new technique 
or device—the right to exclude anyone else from the production or use of the new prod-
uct for some time.
How should governments design patent laws? On the one hand, protection is needed 
to provide firms with the incentives to spend on R&D. On the other, once firms have 
 discovered new products, it would be best for society if the knowledge embodied in those 
new products were made available without restriction to other firms and to people. Take, 
for example, biogenetic research. Only the prospect of large profits can lead bioengineer-
ing firms to embark on expensive research projects. Once a firm has found a new product, 
and the product can save many lives, it would clearly be best to make it available at cost 
to all potential users. But if such a policy were systematically followed, it would eliminate 
incentives for firms to do research in the first place. So patent law must strike a difficult 
balance. Too little protection will lead to little R&D. Too much protection will make it diffi-
cult for new R&D to build on the results of past R&D and may also lead to little R&D. (The 
difficulty of designing good patent or copyright laws is illustrated in the cartoon about 
cloning.)
This type of dilemma is 
known as time inconsistency. 
We shall see other examples 
and discuss it at length in 
Chapter 22.
b
These issues go beyond pat-
ent laws. To take two contro-
versial examples: What is the 
role of open-source software? 
Should students download 
music, movies, and even text-
books (you see where I am 
going here) without making 
payments to the creators?
b
© Chappatte in “L’Hebdo,” Lausanne, www.globecartoon.com


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 53 ===
of an even better product by another firm, there may be little advantage to being first.
In other words, a highly fertile field of research may not generate high levels of R&D
because no company will find the investment worthwhile. This example is extreme, but
revealing.

Even more important is the legal protection given to new products. Without such
legal protection, profits from the development of a new product are likely to be small.
Except in rare cases where the product is based on a trade secret (such as Coca Cola), it
will generally not take long for other firms to produce the same product, eliminating any
advantage the innovating firm may have initially had. This is why countries have patent
laws. Patents give a firm that has discovered a new product—usually a new technique
or device—the right to exclude anyone else from the production or use of the new prod-
uct for some time.

How should governments design patent laws? On the one hand, protection is needed
to provide firms with the incentives to spend on R&D. On the other, once firms have
discovered new products, it would be best for society if the knowledge embodied in those
new products were made available without restriction to other firms and to people. Take,
for example, biogenetic research. Only the prospect of large profits can lead bioengineer-
ing firms to embark on expensive research projects. Once a firm has found a new product,
and the product can save many lives, it would clearly be best to make it available at cost
to all potential users. But if such a policy were systematically followed, it would eliminate

This type of dilemma is
known as time inconsistency.
We shall see other examples
and discuss it at length in

incentives for firms to do research in the first place. So patent law must strike a difficult < Chapter 22.

balance. Too little protection will lead to little R&D. Too much protection will make it diffi-

cult for new R&D to build on the results of past R&D and may also lead to little R&D. (The < These issues go beyond pat-

difficulty of designing good patent or copyright laws is illustrated in the cartoon about
cloning.)

i=
8
8
8
8
3
3
3
|
5
g
3
3
4

L'Hebdo,

© Chappatte i

Chapter 12 Technological Progress and Growth

ent laws. To take two contro-
versial examples: What is the
role of open-source software?
Should students download
music, movies, and even text-
books (you see where | am
going here) without making
payments to the creators?

253


=== PAGE 54 ===
254 
The Long Run 
The Core
Innovation versus Imitation
Although R&D is clearly central to technological progress, other dimensions are also rele-
vant. Existing technologies can be used more or less efficiently. Strong competition among 
firms forces them to be more efficient. And, as shown in the Focus Box “Management 
Practices: Another Dimension of Technological Progress,” good management makes a 
substantial difference to the productivity of firms. Finally, for some countries, R&D may 
be less important than for others.
In this context, recent research on growth has emphasized the distinction between 
growth by innovation and growth by imitation. To sustain growth, advanced countries, 
which are at the technology frontier, must innovate. This requires substantial spend-
ing on R&D. Poorer countries, which are further from the technology frontier, can instead 
grow largely by imitating rather than innovating, by importing and adapting existing 
technologies instead of developing new ones. Importation and adaptation of existing 
technologies has clearly played a central role in generating high growth in China over 
the last three decades.
The difference between innovation and imitation also explains why countries that 
are less technologically advanced often have poorer patent protection (as is true of 
China). These countries are typically users rather than producers of new technologies. 
Much of their improvement in productivity comes not from inventions within the coun-
try but from the adaptation of foreign technologies. So the costs of weak patent protec-
tion are small because there would be few domestic inventions anyway. And the benefits 
of low patent protection are clear: They allow domestic firms to use and adapt foreign 
technology without having to pay high royalties to the foreign firms that developed the 
technology.
At this stage, you might have the following question: If in poor countries technologi-
cal progress is more a process of imitation rather than a process of innovation, why are 
some countries, such as China and other Asian countries, good at doing this, whereas 
others, for example, many African countries, are not? This question takes us from macro-
economics to development economics, and it would take a text in development econom-
ics to do it justice. But it is too important a question to leave aside entirely; we discuss this 
issue in the next section.
Management Practices: Another Dimension  
of Technological Progress
For a given technology and a given human capital of  its 
workers, the way a firm is managed also affects its perfor-
mance. Some researchers argue that management practices 
might be stronger than many of  the other factors that deter-
mine a firm’s performance, including technological innova-
tion. In a project that examined the management practices 
and performance of  more than 4,000 medium-sized manu-
facturing operations in Europe, the United States, and Asia, 
Nick Bloom of  Stanford University and John Van Reenen of 
the London School of  Economics found that firms across the 
globe that use the same technology but apply good manage-
ment practices perform significantly better than those that 
do not. This suggests that improved management practices 
are one of  the most effective ways for a firm to outperform 
its peers. (“Why Do Management Practices Differ across 
Firms and Countries?” by Nicholas Bloom and John Van 
Reenen, Journal of  Economic Perspectives, 2010, 24(1): 
pp. 203–224).
A fascinating piece of evidence of the importance of man-
agement practices comes from an experimental study con-
ducted by Nick Bloom and colleagues with 20 Indian textile 
plants. To investigate the role of good management practices, 
they provided free consulting on management practices to a 
randomly chosen group of the 20 plants. Then he compared 
the performance of the firms that received management 
advice with that of the control plants—those that did not 
receive advice. He found that adopting good management 
practices raised productivity by 18% through improved qual-
ity and efficiency and reduced inventory. (“Does Management 
Matter? Evidence from India,” by Nicholas Bloom, Benn 
Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 128(1): pp. 1–51).
FOCUS


=== PAGE 55 ===
 
Chapter 12 
Technological Progress and Growth 
255
12-3 INSTITUTIONS, TECHNOLOGICAL 
PROGRESS, AND GROWTH
To get a sense of why some countries are good at imitating existing technologies, whereas 
others are not, compare Kenya and the United States. PPP GDP per person in Kenya is 
about 1/18th of PPP GDP per person in the United States. The difference is partly due to 
a much lower level of capital per worker in Kenya. It is also due to a much lower techno-
logical level in Kenya, where the state of technology is estimated to be about 1/13th of 
the US level. Why is the state of technology in Kenya so low? The country potentially has 
access to most of the technological knowledge in the world. What prevents it from simply 
adopting much of the advanced countries’ technology and quickly closing much of its 
technological gap with the United States?
One can think of a number of potential answers, ranging from Kenya’s geography 
and climate to its culture. Most economists believe, however, that the main source of 
the problem, for poor countries in general and for Kenya in particular, lies in their poor 
institutions.
What institutions do economists have in mind? At a broad level, the protection of 
property rights may well be the most important. Few individuals are going to create 
firms, introduce new technologies, and invest in R&D if they expect that profits will be 
appropriated by the state, extracted in bribes by corrupt bureaucrats, or stolen by other 
people in the economy. Figure 12-5 plots PPP GDP per person in 1995 (using a logarith-
mic scale) for 90 countries against an index measuring the degree of protection from 
expropriation; the index was constructed for each of these countries by an international 
business organization. The positive correlation between the two is striking (the figure 
also plots the regression line). Low protection is associated with a low GDP per person (at 
the extreme left of the figure are the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Haiti); high 
protection is associated with a high GDP per person (at the extreme right are the United 
States, Luxembourg, Norway, Switzerland, and the Netherlands).
 With an index of 6, Kenya 
is below the regression line, 
which means it has lower 
GDP per person than would 
be predicted based just on 
the index.
b
Log GDP per capita per person, PPP, in 1995
AGO
ARE
ARG
AUS
AUT
BEL
BFA
BGD
BGR
BHR
BHS
BOL
BRA
BWA
CAN
CHE
CHL
CHN
CIV
CMR
COG
COL
CRI
CZE
DNK
DOM DZA
ECU
EGY
ESP
ETH
FIN
FRA
GAB
GBR
GHA
GIN
GMB
GRC
GTM
GUY
HKG
HND
HTI
HUN
IDN
IND
IRL
IRN
ISL
ISR
ITA
JAM
JOR
JPN
KEN
KOR
KWT
LKA
LUX
MAR
MDG
MEX
MLI
MLT
MNG
MOZ MWI
MYS
NER
NGA
NIC
NLD
NOR
NZL
OMN
PAK
PAN
PER
PHL
POL
PRT
PRY
QAT
ROM
RUS
SAU
SDN
SEN
SGP
SLE
SLV
SUR
SWE
SYR
TGO
THA
TTO
TUN
TUR
TZA
UGA
URY
USA
VEN
VNM
YEM
ZAF
ZAR
ZMB
ZWE
Average Protection against Risk of Expropriation, 1985–1995
10
8
6
4
6
8
10
Figure 12-5
Protection from 
Expropriation and GDP 
per Person
There is a strong positive 
relation between the degree 
of protection from expropria-
tion and the level of GDP per 
person.
Source: Daron Acemoglu, 
“Understanding Institutions,” 
Lionel Robbins Lectures, 2004, 
London School of Economics. 
http://economics.mit.edu/
files/1353.


=== PAGE 56 ===
256 
The Long Run 
The Core
The Importance of Institutions: North Korea  
and South Korea
Following the surrender of Japan in 1945, Korea formally 
acquired its independence but became divided at the 38th 
parallel into two zones of occupation, with Soviet armed 
forces occupying the North and US armed forces occupying 
the South. Attempts by both sides to claim jurisdiction over 
all of Korea triggered the Korean War (1950–1953). At the 
armistice in 1953, Korea became formally divided into two 
countries, the Democratic People’s Republic of North Korea 
and, in the South, the Republic of Korea.
An interesting feature of Korea before separation was its 
ethnic and linguistic homogeneity. The North and the South 
were inhabited by essentially the same people, with the same 
culture and the same religion. Economically, the two regions 
were also highly similar at the time of separation. PPP GDP 
per person, in 1996 dollars, was roughly the same, about 
$700 in both the North and South.
But 50 years later, as shown in Figure 1, PPP GDP per 
person was 10 times higher in South Korea than in North 
Korea—$12,000 versus $1,100! South Korea had joined the 
OECD, the club of rich countries, whereas North Korea had 
seen its GDP per person decrease by nearly two-thirds from 
its peak of $3,000 in the mid-1970s and was facing famine 
on a large scale. (The figure, taken from the work of Daron 
Acemoglu, shows the numbers up to 1998. In 2017, the 
difference had further increased, with PPP GDP per person 
around $30,000 in South Korea versus $1,800 for North 
Korea.)
A striking visualization of the difference is shown in 
Figure 2, which shows a satellite picture of Korea at night. 
The dark space between South Korea (lower right quadrant) 
and China (upper left quadrant) is North Korea.
What happened? Institutions and the organization 
of  the economy were dramatically different during that 
period in the South and in the North. South Korea relied 
on a capitalist organization of  the economy, with strong 
state intervention but also private ownership and legal 
protection of  private producers. North Korea relied on cen-
tral planning: Industries were quickly nationalized. Small 
firms and farms were forced to join large cooperatives so 
they could be supervised by the state. There were no pri-
vate property rights for individuals. The result was the 
decline of  the industrial sector and the collapse of  agricul-
ture. The lesson is sad, but clear; institutions matter very 
much for growth.2
FOCUS
GDP per capita
14,000
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
1998
South Korea
North Korea
PPP GDG per person (1996 dollars)
Figure 1
PPP GDP per Person: North and South Korea, 1950–1998
2Source: Daron Acemoglu, “Understanding Institutions,” Lionel Robbins Lectures, 2004, London School of Economics. 
http://economics.mit.edu/files/1353.


=== PAGE 57 ===
 
Chapter 12 
Technological Progress and Growth 
257
What does protection of property rights mean in practice? It means a good political 
system, in which those in charge cannot expropriate or seize the property of the citizens. 
It means a good judicial system, where disagreements can be resolved efficiently, rapidly, 
and fairly. Looking at a finer degree of detail, it means laws against insider trading in 
the stock market, so people are willing to buy stocks and thus provide financing to firms; 
clearly written and well-enforced patent laws, so firms have an incentive to do research 
and develop new products; good antitrust laws, so competitive markets do not turn 
into monopolies with few incentives to introduce new methods of production and new 
products—and the list obviously goes on. (A particularly dramatic example of the role of 
institutions is given in the Focus Box “The Importance of Institutions: North Korea and 
South Korea.”)
This still leaves one essential question: Why don’t poor countries adopt these good 
institutions? The answer is that it is hard! Good institutions are complex and difficult for 
poor countries to put in place. Certainly, causality runs both ways in Figure 12-5: Low 
protection against expropriation leads to low GDP per person. But it is also the case that 
low GDP per person leads to worse protection against expropriation. Poor countries are 
often too poor to afford a good judicial system and to maintain a good police force, for 
example. Thus, improving institutions and starting a virtuous cycle of higher GDP per 
person and better institutions is difficult. The fast-growing countries of Asia have suc-
ceeded. (The Focus Box “What Is behind Chinese Growth?” explores the case of China 
in more detail.) Some African countries appear also to be succeeding; others are still 
struggling.
 A quote from Gordon Brown, 
a former UK prime minister: 
“In establishing the rule of 
law, the first five centuries are 
always the hardest!”
b
Figure 2
Korea at night
NASA Earth Observatory


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 57 ===
Figure 2

Korea at night

What does protection of property rights mean in practice? It means a good political
system, in which those in charge cannot expropriate or seize the property of the citizens.
It means a good judicial system, where disagreements can be resolved efficiently, rapidly,
and fairly. Looking at a finer degree of detail, it means laws against insider trading in
the stock market, so people are willing to buy stocks and thus provide financing to firms;
clearly written and well-enforced patent laws, so firms have an incentive to do research
and develop new products; good antitrust laws, so competitive markets do not turn
into monopolies with few incentives to introduce new methods of production and new
products—and the list obviously goes on. (A particularly dramatic example of the role of
institutions is given in the Focus Box “The Importance of Institutions: North Korea and
South Korea.”)

This still leaves one essential question: Why don't poor countries adopt these good
institutions? The answer is that it is hard! Good institutions are complex and difficult for
poor countries to put in place. Certainly, causality runs both ways in Figure 12-5: Low
protection against expropriation leads to low GDP per person. But it is also the case that
low GDP per person leads to worse protection against expropriation. Poor countries are
often too poor to afford a good judicial system and to maintain a good police force, for
example. Thus, improving institutions and starting a virtuous cycle of higher GDP per
person and better institutions is difficult. The fast-growing countries of Asia have suc-
ceeded. (The Focus Box “What Is behind Chinese Growth?” explores the case of China
in more detail.) Some African countries appear also to be succeeding; others are still
struggling.

Chapter 12 Technological Progress and Growth

NASA Earth Observatory

A quote from Gordon Brown,
a former UK prime minister:
“In establishing the rule of
law, the first five centuries are

4 always the hardest!”

257


=== PAGE 58 ===
258 
The Long Run 
The Core
What Lies Behind Chinese Growth?
From 1949—the year the People’s Republic of China was 
established—to the late 1970s, China’s economic system 
was based on central planning. Two major politico-economic 
reforms, the Great Leap Forward in 1958 and the Cultural 
Revolution in 1966, ended up as human and economic 
catastrophes. Output decreased by 20% from 1959 to 1962, 
and it is estimated that 25 million people died of famine dur-
ing the same period. Output again decreased by more than 
10% from 1966 to 1968.
After Chairman Mao’s death in 1976, the new leaders 
decided to progressively introduce market mechanisms in the 
economy. In 1978, an agricultural reform was put in place, 
allowing farmers, after satisfying a quota due to the state, 
to sell their production in rural markets. Over time, farmers 
obtained increasing rights to the land, and today state farms 
produce less than 1% of agricultural output. Outside of agri-
culture, and also starting in the late 1970s, state firms were 
given increasing autonomy over their production decisions, 
and market mechanisms and prices were introduced for an 
increasing number of goods. Private entrepreneurship was 
encouraged, often taking the form of “Township and Village 
Enterprises,” collective ventures guided by a profit motive. 
Tax advantages and special agreements were used to attract 
foreign investors.
The economic effects of these cumulative reforms were 
dramatic. Average growth of output per worker increased 
from 2.5% between 1952 and 1977 to more than 9% since 
then. Even today, growth remains above 6% (see Chapter 1). 
This was the result of both very high rates of capital accumu-
lation and of technological progress (see the further discus-
sion in the appendix to this chapter).
Is such high growth surprising? One could argue that it 
is not. Looking at the more than 10-fold difference in pro-
ductivity between North Korea and South Korea noted in the 
previous Focus Box, it is clear that central planning is a poor 
economic system. Thus, it would seem that, by moving from 
central planning to a market economy, countries could eas-
ily experience large increases in productivity. The answer is 
not so obvious, however, when one looks at the experience 
of the many countries that, since the late 1980s, have moved 
away from central planning. In most Central European coun-
tries, this transition was typically associated with an initial 
10% to 20% drop in GDP, and it took five years or more for 
output to exceed its pre-transition level. In Russia and in the 
new countries carved out of the Soviet Union, the drop was 
even larger and longer lasting. (Many transition countries 
now have strong growth, although their growth rates are far 
below that of China.)
In Central and Eastern Europe, the initial effect of transi-
tion was a collapse of the state sector, only partially compen-
sated by slow growth of the new private sector. In China, the 
state sector has declined more slowly, and its decline has been 
more than compensated by strong private sector growth. 
This gives a proximate explanation for the difference between 
China and the other transition countries. But it still begs 
the question: How was China able to achieve this smoother 
transition?
Some observers offer a cultural explanation. They 
point to the Confucian tradition, based on the teachings of 
Confucius, which still dominates Chinese values and empha-
sizes hard work, respect of one’s commitments, and trustwor-
thiness among friends. All these traits, they argue, are the 
foundations of institutions that allow a market economy to 
perform well.
Some observers offer a historical explanation. They point 
to the fact that, in contrast to Russia, central planning in 
China lasted only a few decades. Thus, when the shift back to 
a market economy took place, people still knew how such an 
economy functioned and adapted easily to the new economic 
environment.
Most observers point to the strong rule of the commu-
nist party in the process. They point out that, in contrast 
to Central and Eastern Europe, the political system did not 
change, and the government was able to control the pace of 
transition. It was able to experiment along the way, to allow 
state firms to continue production while the private sector 
grew, and to guarantee property rights to foreign investors 
(in Figure 12-5, China has an index of property rights of 7.7, 
not far from its typical value in rich countries). With foreign 
investors has come the technology from rich countries, and, 
in time, the transfer of this knowledge to domestic firms. For 
political reasons, such a strategy was simply not open to gov-
ernments in Central and Eastern Europe.
The limits of the Chinese strategy are clear. Leaving aside 
the central issue of limits to democracy and focusing on 
the economic issues: The banking system is still inefficient. 
Recently, under President Xi JinPing, the shift from the state 
sector to the private sector has slowed down. So far, however, 
these problems have not stood in the way of high growth, 
which remains around 6%.
For more on China’s economy, read Gregory Chow, China’s 
Economic Transformation, 3rd ed. (2014, Wiley-Blackwell).
For a comparison between transition in Eastern 
Europe and China, read Jan Svejnar, “China in Light of the 
Performance of Central and East European Economies,” IZA 
Discussion Paper 2791, May 2007.
FOCUS


=== PAGE 59 ===
 
Chapter 12 
Technological Progress and Growth 
259
SUMMARY
 
■When we think about the implications of technological 
progress for growth, it is useful to think of technological 
progress as increasing the amount of effective labor avail-
able in the economy (that is, labor multiplied by the state of 
technology). We can then think of output as being produced 
with capital and effective labor.
 
■In steady state, output per effective worker and capital per 
effective worker are constant. Put another way, output per 
worker and capital per worker grow at the rate of technologi-
cal progress. Put yet another way, output and capital grow 
at the same rate as effective labor, thus at a rate equal to the 
growth rate of the number of workers plus the rate of tech-
nological progress.
 
■When the economy is in steady state, it is said to be on a bal-
anced growth path. Output, capital, and effective labor are 
all growing “in balance,” that is, at the same rate.
 
■The rate of output growth in steady state is indepen-
dent of the saving rate. However, the saving rate affects 
the steady-state level of output per effective worker. And 
increases in the saving rate will lead, for some time, to an 
increase in the growth rate above the steady-state growth 
rate.
 
■Technological progress depends on both (1) the fertility of 
research and development, how spending on R&D trans-
lates into new ideas and new products, and (2) the appropri-
ability of the results of R&D, which is the extent to which 
firms benefit from the results of their R&D.
 
■When designing patent laws, governments must bal-
ance their desire to protect future discoveries and provide 
incentives for firms to do R&D with their desire to make 
existing discoveries available without restriction to poten-
tial users.
 
■Sustained technological progress requires that the right 
institutions are in place. In particular, it requires well- 
established and well-protected property rights. Without 
good property rights, a country is likely to remain poor. But 
in turn, a poor country may find it difficult to put in place 
good property rights.
KEY TERMS
state of technology, 244
effective labor, 244
labor in efficiency units, 245
balanced growth, 248
research and development (R&D), 250
fertility of research, 251
appropriability, 251
patents, 253
technology frontier, 254
property rights, 255
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using the information in this chapter, label each of the following 
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. Writing the production function in terms of capital and 
effective labor implies that as the level of technology 
increases by 10%, the number of workers required to 
achieve the same level of output decreases by 10%.
b. If the rate of technological progress increases, the invest-
ment rate (the ratio of investment to output) must increase 
to keep capital per effective worker constant.
c. In steady state, output per effective worker grows at the 
rate of population growth.
d. In steady state, output per worker grows at the rate of tech-
nological progress.
e. A higher saving rate implies a higher level of capital per 
effective worker in the steady state and thus a higher rate 
of growth of output per effective worker.
f. Even if the potential returns from research and develop-
ment (R&D) spending are identical to the potential returns 
from investing in a new machine, R&D spending is much 
riskier for firms than investing in new machines.
g. The fact that one cannot patent a theorem implies that pri-
vate firms will not engage in basic research.
h. Because eventually we will know everything, growth will 
have to come to an end.
i. Technology has not played an important part in Chinese 
economic growth.
2. R&D and growth
a. Why is the amount of R&D spending important for growth? 
How do the appropriability and fertility of research affect 
the amount of R&D spending?
How does each of the policy proposals listed in parts b  
through e affect the appropriability and fertility of research, R&D 
spending in the long run, and output in the long run?
b. An international treaty ensuring that each country’s pat-
ents are legally protected all over the world. This may be 
a part of the proposed but now cancelled Trans-Pacific 
Partnership.
c. Tax credits for each dollar of R&D spending.
d. A decrease in funding of government-sponsored confer-
ences between universities and corporations.
e. The elimination of patents on breakthrough drugs, so 
the drugs can be sold at low cost as soon as they become 
available.


=== PAGE 60 ===
260 
The Long Run 
The Core
3. Sources of technological progress: Leaders versus followers
a. Where does technological progress come from for the eco-
nomic leaders of the world?
b. Do developing countries have alternatives to the sources of 
technological progress you mentioned in part a?
c. Do you see any reasons developing countries may choose 
to have poor patent protection? Are there any dangers in 
such a policy (for developing countries)?
DIG DEEPER
4. For each of the economic changes listed in parts a and b, assess 
the likely impact on the growth rate and the level of output over the 
next five years and over the next five decades.
a. A permanent reduction in the rate of technological progress.
b. A permanent reduction in the saving rate.
5. Measurement error, inflation, and productivity growth
Suppose that there are only two goods produced in an econ-
omy: haircuts and banking services. Prices, quantities, and the 
number of workers occupied in the production of each good for  
year 1 and for year 2 are given in the table:
Year
Year 1
Year 2
Variables
P1
Q1
N1
P2
Q2
N2
Haircuts
10
100
50
12
100
50
Banking
10
200
50
12
230
60
a. What is nominal GDP in each year?
b. Using year 1 prices, what is real GDP in year 2? What is the 
growth rate of real GDP?
c. What is the rate of inflation using the GDP deflator?
d. Using year 1 prices, what is real GDP per worker in 
year 1 and year 2? What is labor productivity growth 
between year 1 and year 2 for the whole economy?
Now suppose that banking services in year 2 are not the same 
as banking services in year 1. Year 2 banking services include 
telebanking, which year 1 banking services did not include. The 
technology for telebanking was available in year 1, but the price 
of banking services with telebanking in year 1 was $13, and no 
one chose to purchase this package. However, in year 2, the price 
of banking services with telebanking was $12, and everyone chose 
to have this package (i.e., in year 2 no one chose to have the year 1 
banking services package without telebanking). (Hint: Assume that 
there are now two types of banking services: those with telebanking 
and those without. Rewrite the preceding table but now with three 
goods: haircuts and the two types of banking services.)
e. Using year 1 prices, what is real GDP for year 2? What is the 
growth rate of real GDP?
f. What is the rate of inflation using the GDP deflator?
g. What is labor productivity growth between year 1 and 
year 2 for the whole economy?
h. Consider 
this 
statement: 
“If 
banking 
services 
are 
 mismeasured—for example, by not taking into account the 
introduction of telebanking—we will overestimate inflation 
and underestimate productivity growth.” Discuss this state-
ment in light of your answers to parts a through g.
6. Suppose that the economy’s production function is
Y = 2K 2AN
that the saving rate, s, is equal to 16%, and that the rate of depre-
ciation, d, is equal to 10%. Suppose further that the number of 
workers grows at 2% per year and that the rate of technological 
progress is 4% per year.
a. Find the steady-state values of the variables listed in (i) 
through (v).
i. The capital stock per effective worker
ii. Output per effective worker
iii. The growth rate of output per effective worker
iv. The growth rate of output per worker
v. The growth rate of output
b. Suppose that the rate of technological progress doubles to 
8% per year. Recompute the answers to part a. Explain.
c. Now suppose that the rate of  technological progress 
is still equal to 4% per year, but the number of  work-
ers now grows at 6% per year. Recompute the answers 
to part a. Are people better off  in part a or part c? 
Explain.
7. Discuss the potential role of each of the factors listed in parts a 
through g on the steady-state level of output per worker. In each 
case, indicate whether the effect is through A, through K, through 
H, or through some combination of A, K, and H. A is the level of 
technology, K is the level of capital stock, and H is the level of the 
human capital stock.
a. Geographic location
b. Education
c. Protection of property rights
d. Openness to trade
e. Low tax rates
f. Good public infrastructure
g. Low population growth
EXPLORE FURTHER
8. Growth accounting
The appendix to this chapter shows how data on output, 
capital, and labor can be used to construct estimates of the rate of 
growth of technological progress. We modify that approach in this 
problem to examine the growth of capital per worker.
Y = K1>3 1AN22>3
The function gives a good description of production in rich countries. 
Following the same steps as in the appendix, you can show that
 12>32gA = gY - 12>32gN - 11>32gK
 = 1gY - gN2 - 11>321gK - gN2
where gY denotes the growth rate of Y, gK is the growth rate of capi-
tal, and gN is the growth rate of the labor input.
a. What does the quantity gY - gN represent? What does the 
quantity gK - gN represent?
b. Your download of the Penn World Tables in Chapter 10 
includes the information needed to calculate the compo-
nents of the growth accounting formula in the appendix. 
That formula is
residual K gY - 3agN + 11 - a2gK4


=== PAGE 61 ===
 
Chapter 12 
Technological Progress and Growth 
261
From the Penn World Tables, you can fill in the chart below:
Use rgdpo for output (2011 US dollars); emp for number of 
employees labor input; ck for the capital stock (2011 US dollars)
The share of labor is labsh. These values are copied 
directly from the Penn World Tables version 9.
Year 2000
Year 2014
Y
N
K
Share
of labor
Y
N
K
Share  
of labor
China
United 
States
Calculate annual growth rates of these variables over the 
14 years of available data and answer these questions:
Is the ratio of K/N rising or falling in China? In the United 
States? Which country has the highest labor share? Which 
country has the largest residual? (Use the average labor 
share over the two years to calculate the residual.) What 
does that residual represent? Are you surprised by any of 
your results?
FURTHER READINGS
 
■For more on growth, both theory and evidence, read 
Charles Jones, Introduction to Economic Growth, 3rd 
ed. (2013). Jones’s Web page, http://web.stanford.
edu/~chadj/, is a useful portal to the research on growth.
 
■For more on patents, see The Economist, Special Report: 
Patents and Technology, October 20th, 2005.
 
■For more on growth in two large, fast-growing countries, 
read Barry Bosworth and Susan M. Collins, “Accounting for 
Growth: Comparing China and India,” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives, 2008, Vol. 22, No. 1: 45–66.
 
■For the role of institutions in growth, read sections 1  
to 4 in “Growth Theory Through the Lens of Development 
Economics,” by Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo, Chapter 
7, Handbook of Economic Growth (2005).
 
■For more on institutions and growth, you can read the 
slides from the 2004 Lionel Robbins lectures “Understand-
ing Institutions” given by Daron Acemoglu. These are 
found at http://economics.mit.edu/files/1353.
 
■For the role of ideas in sustaining technological progress 
and growth, listen to Paul Romer’s 2018 Nobel Prize  
lecture, www.youtube.com/watch?v=vZmgZGIZtiM.


=== PAGE 62 ===
262 
The Long Run 
The Core
APPENDIX: How to Measure Technological Progress,  
and the Application to China
In Section 12-1, we discussed the joint role of capital accu-
mulation and technological progress in determining growth. 
We saw that, in steady state, growth of output per person 
was determined fully by the rate of technological progress. 
Out of steady state, however, a growth rate of the capital 
stock higher than the growth rate of output—due to, say, an 
increase in the saving rate—could lead to higher growth for 
some time.
This raises the question: How do we measure the rate 
of technological progress? The answer was given in 1957 by 
Robert Solow and is still in use today. It relies on one important 
assumption: that each factor of production is paid its marginal 
product.
Under this assumption, it is easy to compute the contribu-
tion of an increase in any factor of production to the increase 
in output. For example, if a worker is paid $30,000 a year, the 
assumption implies that her contribution to output is equal to 
$30,000. Now suppose that this worker increases the amount 
of hours she works by 10%. The increase in output from 
the increase in her hours will be equal to $30,000 * 10%, or 
$3,000.
Let us write this more formally. Denote output by Y, labor 
by N, and the real wage by W/P. The notation ∆x means the 
change in variable x. Then, as we just established, the change 
in output is equal to the real wage multiplied by the change in 
labor.
∆Y = W
P ∆N
Divide both sides of the equation by Y, divide and multiply the 
right side by N, and reorganize:
∆Y
Y
= WN
PY
  ∆N
N
Note that the first term on the right (WN>PY) is equal to the 
share of labor in output—the total wage bill in dollars divided 
by the value of output in dollars. Denote this share by a. ∆Y>Y 
is the rate of growth of output; denote it by gY. ∆N>N is the 
rate of change of the labor input; denote it by gN. Then the pre-
vious relation can be written as
gY = a gN
More generally, this reasoning implies that the part of out-
put growth attributable to growth of the labor input is equal to 
a times gN. If, for example, employment grows by 1.7% (you 
will see below why I am using this and the other numbers) and 
the share of labor is 0.6, then the output growth due to the 
growth in employment is equal to 1.0% (0.6 times 1.7%).
Similarly, we can compute the part of output growth 
attributable to growth of the capital stock. Because there are 
only two factors of production, labor and capital, and because 
the share of labor is equal to a, the share of capital in income 
must be equal to (1 - a). If the growth rate of capital is equal 
to gK, then the part of output growth attributable to growth 
of capital is equal to (1 - a) times gK. If, for example, capital 
grows by 9.2%, and the share of capital is 0.4, then the output 
growth due to the growth of the capital stock is equal to 3.7% 
(0.4 times 9.2%).
Putting the contributions of labor and capital together, the 
growth in output attributable to growth in both labor and capi-
tal is equal to (agN + (1 - a)gK), so in our numerical example, 
1.0% + 3.7% = 4.7%.
We can then measure the effects of technological prog-
ress by computing what Solow called the residual, the excess 
of actual growth of output gY over the growth attributable to 
growth of labor and the growth of capital (agN + (1 - a)gK).
residual K gY - 3agN + (1 - a)gK4
This measure is called the Solow residual. It is easy to 
compute. All we need to know are the growth rate of output, 
gY, the growth rate of labor, gN, and the growth rate of capital, 
gK, together with the shares of labor, a, and capital, (1 - a). 
To continue with our previous numerical example: If output 
growth is equal to 7.2%, then the Solow residual is equal to 
7.2% - 4.7% = 2.5%.
The Solow residual is sometimes called the rate of 
growth of total factor productivity (or the rate of TFP 
growth). The use of total factor productivity is to distinguish 
it from the rate of growth of labor productivity, which is defined 
as (gY - gN), the rate of output growth minus the rate of labor 
growth.
The Solow residual is related to the rate of technological 
progress in a simple way. The residual is equal to the share of 
labor times the rate of technological progress:
residual = agA
We shall not derive this result here. But the intuition for 
this relation comes from the fact that what matters in the pro-
duction function Y = F(K, AN) (equation (12.1)) is the product 
of the state of technology and labor, AN. We saw that to get the 
contribution of labor growth to output growth, we must multi-
ply the growth rate of labor by its share. Because N and A enter 
the production function in the same way, it is clear that to get 
the contribution of technological progress to output growth, we 
must also multiply it by the share of labor.
If the Solow residual is equal to zero, so is technological 
progress. To construct an estimate of gA, we must construct the 
Solow residual and then divide it by the share of labor. This is 
how the estimates of gA presented in the text are constructed. 
Going back to our numerical example, if the share of labor is 0.6, 
the rate of technological progress is equal to 2.5%/0.6 = 4.2%.


=== PAGE 63 ===
 
Chapter 12 
Technological Progress and Growth 
263
You may wonder why I used the numbers above. The rea-
son is simple: These are the numbers for China for the period 
1978 to 2017, the period that was described in the Focus Box as 
the period of high growth. What do the numbers say?
Output growth was very high, 7.2%. Growth of output per 
worker was also very high, at 5.5%. The rate of technological 
progress was also high, but not quite as much, namely 4.2%. 
The difference between the growth rate of output and the rate 
of technological progress reflected a steady increase in the ratio 
of capital to output, equal to 2% a year. In terms of Figure 12-2, 
the Chinese economy moved from (K>AN)0 to (K>AN)*.
Eventually, the ratio of capital to output will stabilize, and 
the growth of output per worker will reflect the rate of techno-
logical progress. Thus, if this rate remains the same, China’s 
growth of output per worker will decrease to 4.2%. If growth of 
labor remains the same, namely 1.7%, then growth of output 
will converge to 5.9%. This does indeed roughly correspond to 
forecasts of future growth in China.
The original presentation of the ideas discussed in this 
appendix is found in Robert Solow, “Technical Change and 
the Aggregate Production Function,” Review of Economics and 
Statistics, 1957, 39(3): pp. 312–320.
Key Terms
Solow residual, 262
rate of growth of total factor productivity, 262
rate of TFP growth, 262


=== PAGE 64 ===
This page is intentionally left blank


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 64 ===
This page is intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 65 ===
265
The Challenges of 
Growth
M
uch of the focus of Chapters 10 to 12 was on steady-state growth—the steady 
increase in the standard of living over time. This may have led you to form too 
optimistic a picture. Growth is in fact a complex process, facing many chal-
lenges. You read about them in newspapers every day: Can we be confident 
that technological progress will continue at the same rate? Should we be worried that robots 
will destroy jobs and lead to mass unemployment? Does everybody really benefit from the 
increased standard of living? And, in the process of growing, aren’t we destroying the planet 
and mortgaging our future? These are the issues I take up in this chapter.
Section 13-1 discusses the future of technological progress. Some economists believe 
that the era of major inventions is largely over and we should expect technological progress to 
slow down considerably. Others believe instead that we are on the verge of another technologi-
cal revolution and the future is bright. What are the arguments on both sides, and what should 
we expect?
Section 13-2 discusses whether technological progress will lead to mass unemployment. 
Such fears go back a long way but have so far proven unfounded. Will the future be different? If 
so, what policies should we adopt?
Section 13-3 discusses the relation between growth and inequality. Inequality has 
increased, and technological progress and globalization are blamed. What is the evidence? And, 
if they are responsible, what policies should be adopted to limit the increase in inequality?
Section 13-4 discusses climate change. Growth is blamed for various ecological disasters. 
It is believed to be one of the main factors behind climate change. What is the evidence? If it is 
responsible, what policies should be adopted? What is the chance that the policies will indeed 
be adopted?
13
I have started every chapter so far with “If you remember one basic message from 
this chapter, it should be...”. I did not succeed in summarizing the conclusions of 
this chapter in one sentence. But the general theme is that growth is a complex pro-
cess, and policies to make it fair and sustainable are of the essence. 


=== PAGE 66 ===
266 
The Long Run 
The Core
13-1  THE FUTURE OF TECHNOLOGICAL 
PROGRESS
There is a strange tension between, on the one hand, the perception of fast technologi-
cal progress and, on the other, the productivity growth numbers. Looking around us, 
we have the impression of fast technological change, be it the introduction of robots, 
the development of artificial intelligence, the use of machine learning, or, more con-
cretely, the number of applications that we can use on our smart phones. One might have 
expected this to be reflected in higher measured productivity growth. Yet, as we saw in 
Table 1-2 in Chapter 1, US measured productivity growth has slowed down since the 
mid-2000s, running at less than half the rate of earlier decades.
How can the two be reconciled? One possible answer is measurement error. As 
we discussed in the Focus Box “Real GDP, Technological Progress, and the Price of 
Computers” in Chapter 2, measuring technological progress is difficult. For example, 
how much better is a 2018 computer relative to a 2010 computer? Although statistical 
agencies try to adjust for changes in speed, hard disk size, and so on, they do not do a 
perfect job. And the challenge is even bigger with respect to new software. How much 
should we value the fact that we can now access instantaneously nearly any piece of 
music we want to listen to?
Could it be therefore that we understate the rate of productivity growth, and that 
the true rate is higher? Research on the topic suggests that the answer is yes, but it comes 
with a twist: It does not appear that, for the economy as a whole, the mismeasurement 
has substantially increased. Put another way, mismeasurement can explain only a small 
part of the decrease in measured productivity growth.
If we take as given that there is truly a decline in productivity growth, how can we 
explain it? This is the subject of intense debate among researchers.
Some argue that the current major innovations are less important than the major 
innovations of the past. Major innovations are innovations that have applications in 
many fields and many products. (For this reason, these innovations are called general-
purpose technologies.) Robert Gordon, of Northwestern University, has studied the 
history of technological innovations and argues that the two major innovations of the 
last 150 years were electricity and the internal combustion engine. For many decades 
after their introduction, they transformed methods of production and life in general in 
often dramatic ways. To list a few examples: Electricity led to the use of air conditioning 
and the development of the South of the United States. It led to the development of refrig-
erators and thus the ability to keep food for much longer periods of time, changing the 
system of food production and distribution. The internal combustion engine led to auto-
mobiles, triggering the building of interstate highways and shaping the development of 
cities. The current major innovation, he argues, namely digitization, does not come close 
to having the same wide implications. Thus, we should not expect it to have the same 
impact as those previous major innovations. The period of high technological progress, 
he claims, is behind us.
Others, in particular Eric Brynjolfsson of MIT, argue that digitization, together 
with the increasing power of computers, will transform our lives as much as or more 
than electricity or the internal combustion engine did earlier. Artificial intelligence and 
machine learning may transform nearly any activity, from driverless cars to the map-
ping of the human genome and major progress in medicine, to the way lawyers access 
relevant jurisprudence. He argues that the current low productivity growth reflects the 
slow process of diffusion and the discovery of new applications. He concludes that the 
future is bright, and he sees no end to technological progress.
How much better is your 
smartphone than your previ-
ous smartphone? Better for 
sure, but how much better: 
20%, 50%, 100%?
c
We saw in Chapter 12 that 
slower productivity growth 
could come from a decrease 
in the ratio of capital to out-
put or from a slowdown of 
technological progress. The 
ratio of capital to output has 
remained roughly constant, 
however, so the origin of 
slower productivity growth 
is slower technological 
progress.
c
There is no agreement about 
whether the innovation 
should be called digitization 
or digitalization.
c
On the speed of  diffusion: 
See the Focus Box in 
Chapter 12, “The Diffusion 
of New Technology: Hybrid 
Corn.”
c


=== PAGE 67 ===
 
Chapter 13 
The Challenges of Growth 
267
Who is right, who is wrong? The honest answer is that nobody really knows. There 
are a number of spectacularly wrong predictions, including that of Thomas Watson, 
former CEO of IBM, who in 1943 said, “I think there is a world market for maybe five 
computers.” But the debate shows the importance of both the process of innovation and 
of the speed of diffusion in explaining technological progress at the frontier. (As I dis-
cussed in Chapter 12, technological progress in countries behind the frontier depends 
largely on other factors, the ability to adapt and use existing technologies, which in turn 
depend on institutions from property rights to education.)
13-2  ROBOTS AND UNEMPLOYMENT
Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, workers have worried that technologi-
cal progress would eliminate jobs and increase unemployment. In early 19th-century 
England, groups of workers in the textile industry, known as the Luddites, destroyed the 
new machines that they saw as a direct threat to their jobs. Similar movements took 
place in other countries. The term saboteur comes from one of the ways French workers 
destroyed machines: by putting their sabots (heavy wooden shoes) into the machines.
The theme of technological unemployment typically resurfaces whenever unem-
ployment is high. During the Great Depression, a movement called the technocracy move-
ment argued that high unemployment came from the introduction of machinery, and 
that things would only get worse if technological progress were allowed to continue. 
In the late 1990s, France passed a law reducing the normal workweek from 39 to 35 
hours. One of the reasons invoked was that, because of technological progress, there was 
no longer enough work for all workers to have full-time jobs; the proposed solution was 
to have each worker work fewer hours (at the same hourly wage) so that more of them 
could be employed. (This was not the only rationale behind the law. Another and better 
reason was that increases in productivity should be taken partly in the form of higher 
income and partly in the form of more leisure. The problem with that argument is why 
the choice between income and leisure should have been legislated rather than left to the 
workers and firms to decide.)
In its crudest form, the argument that technological progress must necessarily lead 
to higher unemployment is obviously false. The large improvements in the standard of 
living that advanced countries enjoy have come with large increases in employment and 
no increase in the unemployment rate. In the United States, real output per person has 
increased by a factor of 10 since 1890 and, far from declining, employment has increased 
by a factor of 6.5 (reflecting a parallel increase in the size of the US population). As we 
have seen, the unemployment rate is very low. Nor, looking across countries, is there any 
evidence of a systematic positive relation between the unemployment rate and the level of 
productivity.
More sophisticated versions of the technological unemployment hypothesis, how-
ever, must be taken more seriously. First, one might expect that, as higher productivity 
leads some firms to reduce employment, it may take time for new jobs to replace the jobs 
that are destroyed, leading to higher unemployment for some time if not forever. The evi-
dence, however, suggests that this is not the case.
Figure 13-1 plots average US labor productivity growth and the average unemploy-
ment rate during each decade since 1890. At first glance, there seems to be little relation 
between the two. But if we ignore the 1930s (the decade of the Great Depression), then a 
relation emerges between productivity growth and the unemployment rate. But it is the 
opposite of the relation predicted by those who believe in technological unemployment. 
Periods of high productivity growth, like the 1940s to the 1960s, have been associated 
For more wildly incorrect 
forecasts of technological 
progress, see www.pcworld.
com/article/155984/worst_
tech_predictions.html
b


=== PAGE 68 ===
268 
The Long Run 
The Core
with a lower unemployment rate. Periods of low productivity growth, such as the United 
States saw during 2010–2018, have been associated with a higher unemployment rate.
What was true in the past may not, however, be true in the future. And robots seem 
threatening enough (the picture makes the case). By their very nature, they can replace 
the least skilled workers; then, as they become more sophisticated, the workers with 
higher skills, and so on. A recent study concludes that, over the next two decades, 47% of 
US workers are at risk of being replaced by robots.
A study by Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo of MIT, looking at the evidence on 
the effect of the introduction of robots on employment in local labor markets, concludes 
that, where they are introduced, robots do indeed destroy jobs. Even if the reduction in 
costs allows firms that use robots to sell their goods more cheaply and thus increase sales 
and output, the substitution of robots for workers dominates the outcome and leads to 
fewer jobs.
The question is whether robots lead to job creation elsewhere. For example, if firms 
that use robots produce cheaper intermediate inputs, other firms now will see their costs 
of production go down and are thus 
likely to increase employment. This is 
much harder to assess. What can be 
said is that, so far, the US unemploy-
ment rate is low by historical stan-
dards even for workers with low skills: 
The unemployment rates for workers 
with a high school degree but no col-
lege and for workers who have not fin-
ished high school are 3.8% and 5.7%, 
respectively, both at historical lows. 
Clearly, whatever jobs were eliminated 
because of robots have been replaced 
by jobs elsewhere. This might, how-
ever, be due to other factors, other 
favorable shocks to employment, and 
189021899
190021909
191021919
192021929
193021939
194021949
195021959
196021969
197021979
198021989
199021999
200022009
201022018
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4
2.8
3.2
3.6
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Average annual labor productivity
growth (percent) 
Average unemployment rate (percent)
Figure 13-1
Productivity Growth and 
Unemployment, Averages 
by Decade, 1890–2018
Source: Data prior to 1960: 
Historical Statistics of the United 
States. Data after 1960: Bureau of 
Labor Statistics.


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 68 ===
Figure 13-1

Productivity Growth and
Unemployment, Averages
by Decade, 1890-2018

Source: Data prior to 1960:
Historical Statistics of the United
States. Data after 1960: Bureau of
Labor Statistics.

268

3.6 —
m 1950-1959

32 mm 1940-1949
g 1960-1969
8 287 9 2000-2009
82 , , 1920-1929
58” 11990-1999 1930-1939 a
BB oo , 7 1970-1979 = 1890-1899
ts
ss 1910-1919 = 1980-1989
ES 16
& & '°/m 1900-1909
8
gs 1.2>-
$ = 2010-2018
< 0.8

0.4

4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20

Average unemployment rate (percent)

with a lower unemployment rate. Periods of low productivity growth, such as the United
States saw during 2010-2018, have been associated with a higher unemployment rate.

What was true in the past may not, however, be true in the future. And robots seem.
threatening enough (the picture makes the case). By their very nature, they can replace
the least skilled workers; then, as they become more sophisticated, the workers with
higher skills, and so on. A recent study concludes that, over the next two decades, 47% of
US workers are at risk of being replaced by robots.

A study by Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo of MIT, looking at the evidence on
the effect of the introduction of robots on employment in local labor markets, concludes
that, where they are introduced, robots do indeed destroy jobs. Even if the reduction in
costs allows firms that use robots to sell their goods more cheaply and thus increase sales
and output, the substitution of robots for workers dominates the outcome and leads to
fewer jobs.

The question is whether robots lead to job creation elsewhere. For example, if firms
that use robots produce cheaper intermediate inputs, other firms now will see their costs
of production go down and are thus
likely to increase employment. This is
much harder to assess. What can be
said is that, so far, the US unemploy-
ment rate is low by historical stan-
dards even for workers with low skills:
The unemployment rates for workers
with a high school degree but no col-
lege and for workers who have not fin-
ished high school are 3.8% and 5.7%,
respectively, both at historical lows.
Clearly, whatever jobs were eliminated
because of robots have been replaced
by jobs elsewhere. This might, how-
ever, be due to other factors, other
favorable shocks to employment, and

The Long Run The Core


=== PAGE 69 ===
 
Chapter 13 
The Challenges of Growth 
269
one cannot be sure that it will hold in the future. And it also leaves open the issue of 
whether workers who lost their jobs to robots got new ones at the same wage or at 
a lower wage. This gets us to the issue of income inequality that we focus on in the 
next section.
In short, so far, robots have not led to anything like mass unemployment or, for 
that matter, to higher unemployment. Although this gets close to science fiction, it is 
interesting to think of what the economy would look like if robots were to eliminate all 
jobs. Put bluntly, it could be hell or heaven. Hell: All robots belong to, say, one extremely 
wealthy owner and everybody else is unemployed. Heaven: Everybody owns the rights 
to one robot apiece and lives on the income from the robot production while enjoying 
a life of leisure. Admittedly, these are beyond extreme scenarios, but they indicate the 
issues that policymakers may face in the future: how to fight inequality—whether, for 
example, to guarantee a minimum income for all, or how much to redistribute wealth 
and property rights.
13-3  GROWTH, CHURN, AND INEQUALITY
Robots are a particularly striking form of technological progress. But the issues they 
raise are more general. Technological progress is fundamentally a process of structural 
change, with profound implications for what happens in labor markets.
The theme was central to the work of Joseph Schumpeter, a Harvard economist who, 
in the 1930s, emphasized that the process of growth was fundamentally a process of 
creative destruction: New goods are developed, making old ones obsolete. New tech-
niques of production are introduced, requiring new skills and making some old skills less 
useful. As this happens, old jobs are eliminated, new jobs are created.
The essence of this process is nicely captured in the following quote from Robert 
McTeer, a past president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, in his introduction to a 
report titled The Churn:
“My grandfather was a blacksmith, as was his father. My dad, however, was part of 
the evolutionary process of the churn. After quitting school in the seventh grade to 
work for the sawmill, he got the entrepreneurial itch. He rented a shed and opened 
a filling station to service the cars that had put his dad out of business. My dad was 
successful, so he bought some land on the top of a hill and built a truck stop. Our 
truck stop was extremely successful until a new interstate went through 20 miles to 
the west. The churn replaced US 411 with Interstate 75, and my visions of the good 
life faded.”
Many professions, from those of blacksmiths to harness makers, have vanished for-
ever. There were more than 11 million farm workers in the United States at the beginning 
of the 20th century; because of high productivity growth in agriculture, there are fewer 
than 1 million today. By contrast, there are now more than 3 million truck, bus, and pro-
fessional car drivers; there were none in 1900. There are more than 1 million computer 
programmers today; there were practically none in 1960.
Even for those with the right skills, the firm where they work may be replaced by 
a more efficient firm, or the product their firm was selling may be replaced by another 
product. This tension between the benefits of technological progress for consumers (and, 
by implication, for firms and their shareholders) and the risks for workers is well captured 
in the cartoon below. The tension between the large gains for society from technological 
change and the potentially large costs for the workers who lose their jobs is explored in 
the Focus Box “Job Destruction, Churn, and Earnings Losses.”
The Churn: The Paradox of 
Progress (1993)
b


=== PAGE 70 ===
270 
The Long Run 
The Core
Job Destruction, Churn and Earnings 
Losses
Technological progress is good for consumers, but it can be 
tough on the workers who lose their jobs. This is documented 
in a study by Steve Davis and Till von Wachter, who used 
records from the Social Security Administration between 
1974 and 2008 to look at what happens to workers who lose 
their job as a result of a mass layoff.
Davis and von Wachter first identified all the firms with 
more than 50 workers where at least 30% of the workforce 
was laid off during one quarter, an event they call a mass lay-
off. Then they identified the laid-off workers who had been 
employed at that firm for at least three years; they classified 
these as long-term employees. They compared the labor market 
experience of long-term employees who were laid off in a mass 
layoff to similar workers in the labor force who did not separate 
in the layoff year or in the next two years. Finally, they com-
pared the workers who experience a mass layoff in a recession 
to those who experience a mass layoff in an expansion.
Figure 1 summarizes their results. The year 0 is the year 
of the mass layoff; years 1, 2, 3, and so on are the years after, 
and the years with negative numbers are those before.
Long-term employees saw their earnings rise relative 
to the rest of society prior to the mass layoff event. Having 
a long-term job at the same firm is good for an individual’s 
wage growth. This is true in both recessions and expansions.
Look at what happened in the first year after the layoff. If 
the mass layoff happened during a recession, a laid-off worker’s 
earnings fell by 40 percentage points relative to a worker who 
did not experience a mass layoff. For the less unfortunate worker 
who experienced a mass layoff during an expansion, the fall in 
relative earnings was smaller but was still 25 percentage points. 
The conclusion: A mass layoff causes enormous relative earn-
ings declines whether it occurs in a recession or an expansion.
Figure 1 makes another important point. The decline in 
relative earnings of workers who were part of a mass layoff 
persisted for years after the layoff. Beyond 5 years or even up 
to 20 years after the mass layoff, workers who experienced it 
suffered a sustained decline in relative earnings of about 20 
percentage points if the mass layoff took place in a recession 
and about 10 percentage points if it took place during an 
expansion. A mass layoff is thus associated with a substan-
tial decline in lifetime earnings.
It is not hard to explain why such earnings losses are likely, 
even if the size of the loss is surprising. The workers who have 
spent a considerable part of their career at the same firm have 
specific skills—skills that are most useful in that firm or indus-
try. These skills are likely to be less valuable elsewhere.
Other studies have found that in families that experience 
a mass layoff, the worker has a less stable employment path 
(more periods of unemployment), poorer health outcomes, 
and children who have a lower level of educational achieve-
ment and higher mortality when compared to the workers 
who have not experienced a mass layoff. These are additional 
costs associated with mass layoffs.
So, although technological change is the main source of 
growth in the long run and clearly enables a higher standard 
of living for the average person, workers who experience 
mass layoffs are clear losers. It is not surprising that techno-
logical change can and does generate anxiety.
FOCUS
2524 23 22 21
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Years before and after job loss in mass layoff
Percent loss in earnings from being laid off
26
245
240
235
230
225
220
215
210
25
0
5
Expansions
Recessions
10
Figure 1
Earnings Losses of Workers 
Who Experience a Mass 
Layoff
Source: Steven J. Davis and Till 
M. von Wachter, “Recessions and 
the Cost of Job Loss,” National 
Bureau of Economics Working 
Paper No. 17638, 2011. Used 
with Permission.


=== PAGE 71 ===
 
Chapter 13 
The Challenges of Growth 
271
The Increase in Wage Inequality
For those in growing sectors or those with the right skills, technological progress leads 
to new opportunities and higher wages. But for those in declining sectors or those with 
skills that are no longer in demand, technological progress can mean the loss of their 
job, a period of unemployment, and possibly much lower wages. The last 35 years in the 
United States have seen a large increase in wage inequality. Most economists believe that 
the main culprit behind this increase is technological change.
Figure 13-2 shows the evolution of relative wages for various groups of workers, by edu-
cation level, since 1973. The figure is based on information about individual workers from 
the Current Population Survey. Each of the lines in the figure shows the evolution of the 
wage of workers with a given level of education—some high school, high school diploma, 
some college, college degree, advanced degree—relative to the wage of workers who only 
have high school diplomas. All relative wages are further divided by their value in 1973, so 
the resulting wage series are all equal to one in 1973. The figure yields a striking conclusion:
We described the Current 
Population Survey and some 
of its uses in Chapter 7.
b
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015
1973 = 1.0
Relative wage by level of education
Some high school
High school diploma
Some college
College degree
Advanced degree
Figure 13-2
Evolution of Relative 
Wages by Education 
Level since 1973
Since the early 1980s, the rel-
ative wages of workers with 
a low education level have 
fallen; the relative wages of 
workers with a high educa-
tion level have risen.
Source: Economic Policy Institute 
Data Zone. www.epi.org/types/
data-zone/.
© Chappatte in “Die Weltwoche,” Zurich, www.globecartoon.com


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 71 ===
© Chappatte in “Die Weltwoche,” Zurich, www.globecartoon.com

The Increase in Wage Inequality

For those in growing sectors or those with the right skills, technological progress leads
to new opportunities and higher wages. But for those in declining sectors or those with
skills that are no longer in demand, technological progress can mean the loss of their
job, a period of unemployment, and possibly much lower wages. The last 35 years in the
United States have seen a large increase in wage inequality. Most economists believe that
the main culprit behind this increase is technological change.

Figure 13-2 shows the evolution of relative wages for various groups of workers, by edu-
cation level, since 1973. The figure is based on information about individual workers from
the Current Population Survey. Each of the lines in the figure shows the evolution of the

We described the Current
Population Survey and some

wage of workers with a given level of education—some high school, high school diploma, < of its uses in Chapter 7.

some college, college degree, advanced degree—relative to the wage of workers who only
have high school diplomas. All relative wages are further divided by their value in 1973, so
the resulting wage series are all equal to one in 1973. The figure yields a striking conclusion:

14>
“A

§ 1.3 —
a Advanced degree ----7
E gree n~
é fo ~ w~

125° / = =
3 “oe “sv XN
3 aa n~/ College degree
ra wb “4. ae Some college
Fe y

y -. _

S OY me ~
3 1.0
£
3 High school diploma
3 L
gc 09 Some high school

08 T

T T T T T T T T T T T T T T
1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015

Chapter 13 The Challenges of Growth

Figure 13-2

Evolution of Relative
Wages by Education
Level since 1973

Since the early 1980s, the rel-
ative wages of workers with
a low education level have
fallen; the relative wages of
workers with a high educa-
tion level have risen.

Source: Economic Policy Institute
Data Zone. www.epi.org/types/
data-zone/

271


=== PAGE 72 ===
272 
The Long Run 
The Core
Starting around the early 1980s, workers with low levels of education have seen 
their relative wage steadily fall over time, whereas workers with high levels of educa-
tion have seen their relative wage steadily rise. At the bottom end of the education lad-
der, the relative wage of workers who have not completed high school has declined by 
11% since the early 1980s. This implies that, in many cases, these workers have seen a 
drop not only in their relative wage but in their absolute real wages as well. At the top 
end of the education ladder, the relative wage of those with an advanced degree has 
increased by 31%. In short, wage inequality has increased a lot in the United States 
over the last 30 years.
The Causes of Increased Wage Inequality
What are the causes of this increase in wage inequality? The main force behind the 
increase in the wage of high-skill relative to low-skill workers is a steady increase in the 
demand for high-skill workers relative to the demand for low-skill workers. This trend in 
relative demand is not new, but it appears to have strengthened. Until the 1980s it was 
largely offset by a steady increase in the relative supply of high-skill workers: A steadily 
larger proportion of children finished high school, went to college, finished college, and so 
on. Since the early 1980s, however, relative supply has continued to increase, but not fast 
enough to match the continuing increase in relative demand. The result has been a steady 
increase in the relative wage of high-skill workers versus low-skill workers. The Focus Box 
“The Long View: Technology, Education, and Inequality” shows how not only the demand 
but also the supply of skills shaped the evolution of wage inequality in the United States 
during the 20th century.
This leads to the next question: What is behind this steady shift in relative demand?
 
■
One line of  argument has focused on the role of  international trade. US firms 
that employ higher proportions of  low-skill workers, the argument goes, are 
increasingly driven out of  markets by imports from similar firms in low-wage 
countries. Alternatively, to remain competitive, firms must relocate some of 
their production to low-wage countries. In both cases, the result is a steady 
decrease in the relative demand for low-skill workers in the United States. There 
are clear similarities between the effects of  trade and the effects of  technologi-
cal progress. Although both trade and technological progress are good for the 
economy as a whole, they lead nonetheless to structural change and make some 
workers worse off.
There is no question that trade is partly responsible for increased wage inequal-
ity. A closer examination, however, shows that trade accounts for only part of the 
shift in relative demand. The most telling fact countering explanations based solely 
on trade is that the shift in relative demand toward high-skill workers is present even 
in sectors that are not exposed to foreign competition.
 
■
The other line of argument has focused on skill-biased technological  progress. 
New machines and new methods of production, the argument goes, require more 
and more high-skill, high-education workers. The development of computers 
requires workers to be increasingly computer literate. New methods of production 
require workers to be more flexible and better able to adapt to new tasks. Greater 
flexibility in turn requires more skills and more education. Unlike explanations 
based on trade, skill-biased technological progress can explain why the shift in rela-
tive demand appears to be present in nearly all sectors of the economy. At this point, 
most economists believe it is the dominant factor in explaining the increase in wage 
inequality.
Note the small decrease in 
wage inequality in 2017 (the 
last year in the figure). Good 
news? Too early to tell. c
Pursuing the effects of inter-
national trade would take 
us too far afield. For a more 
thorough discussion of who 
gains and who loses from 
trade, look at the text by Paul 
Krugman, Maurice Obstfeld, 
and Marc Melitz, International 
Economics, 10th ed. (2014).
b


=== PAGE 73 ===
 
Chapter 13 
The Challenges of Growth 
273
The Long View: Technology, Education, 
and Inequality
For the first three-quarters of the 20th century, wage 
inequality declined. Then it started to rise and has kept grow-
ing since. Claudia Goldin and Larry Katz, two economists 
at Harvard University, point to education as a major factor 
behind the two different trends in inequality.
US educational attainment, measured by the completed 
schooling levels of successive generations of students, was 
exceptionally rapid during the first three-quarters of the cen-
tury. But educational advance slowed considerably for young 
adults beginning in the 1970s and for the overall labor force by 
the early 1980s. For generations born from the 1870s to about 
1950, every decade was accompanied by an increase of about 
0.8 year of education. During that 80-year period the vast 
majority of parents had children whose educational attain-
ment greatly exceeded theirs. A child born in 1945 would have 
been in school 2.2 years more than his or her parents born in 
1921. But a child born in 1975 would have been in school just 
half a year more than his or her parents born in 1951.
Underlying the decision to stay in school longer were 
clear economic incentives. As shown in Figure 1, the return 
to one more year of college education (meaning the increase 
in the average wage for a worker with one more year of col-
lege education) was high in the 1940s: 11% for young men 
and 10% for all men. This induced US families to keep their 
children in school longer and then send them to college. The 
increase in the supply of educated workers lowered both the 
returns to education and the wage differentials. By 1950, the 
return to one more year of college education had fallen back 
to 8% for young men, 9% for all men. But by 1990, rates of 
return were back to their 1930s levels. The return to a year 
of college today is higher than in the 1930s.
There are two lessons to be drawn from this evidence:
The first is that technological progress, even when skill-
biased, that is accompanied by an increase in the demand for 
skilled and educated workers does not necessarily increase 
economic inequality. For the first three-quarters of the 20th 
century, the increase in demand for skills was more than 
met by an increase in the supply of skills, leading to decreas-
ing inequality. Since then, demand growth has continued, 
whereas supply growth has decreased, leading once again to 
increasing inequality.
The second is that, although market forces provide 
incentives for demand to respond to wage differentials, insti-
tutions are also important. For most Americans in the early 
20th century, access to schooling, at least through high 
school, was largely unlimited. Education was publicly pro-
vided and funded and thus free of direct charge, except at 
the highest levels. Even the most rural Americans could send 
their children to public secondary schools, although African 
Americans, especially in the South, were often excluded 
from various levels of schooling. This has made an essential 
difference.
FOCUS
Return to college,
all men
1900
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
Returns to a year of college
Return to college,
young men
Figure 1
Wage Differentials and the Returns to Education, 1939 to 1995
Source: Claudia Goldin and Larry F. Katz, “Decreasing (and then Increasing) Inequality in America: A Tale of Two Half Centuries,” In: Finis Welch 
The Causes and Consequences of Increasing Inequality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press; 2001.pp. 37–82. Used with Permission.


=== PAGE 74 ===
274 
The Long Run 
The Core
Inequality and the Top 1%
We have focused on wage inequality, the distribution of wages across wage  earners. 
Another dimension of inequality, however, is the proportion of income that accrues 
to the richest households (e.g., those in the top 1% of the income distribution). 
When we consider inequality at very high levels of income, wages are not a good mea-
sure of income. Rich rentiers derive their income from the assets they own. Successful 
entrepreneurs derive a large fraction of their income (sometimes almost all of it) not from 
wages but from capital income and capital gains. This is because they are typically paid 
both through wages and through company shares that they can then sell (with some 
limitations) at a profit.
The evolution of the top 1% share, shown in Figure 13-3, is striking. The share of 
income going to households in the top 1% steadily decreased from the 1930s until the 
late 1970s. Since then, however, it has increased sharply, from about 9% to 22% today. 
By contrast, the share of the bottom 50% has sharply decreased, from about 21% in the 
early 1970s (data are not available before 1965) to less than 13% today.
Looking within the top 1%, the numbers are even more striking: While the top 1% 
account for 22% of income, the top 0.1% alone account for 17%, and the top 0.01% 
account for 5.1%. Looking at wealth, inequality is even stronger. The top 0.01% account 
for 11% of total wealth. Inequality in the United States measured this way is “probably 
higher than in any other society at any time in the past, anywhere in the world,” writes 
Thomas Piketty, whose book Capital in the 21st Century topped the list of best-selling 
books worldwide when it was published in 2014.
Who are the people in those high income groups? In the top 1%, the list is the one 
you would expect—doctors, lawyers, executives, owners of medium-size businesses. 
What about the 0.01%? One image is of heirs, living mostly on the income from their 
capital. Another is of successful entrepreneurs, founders of businesses like Amazon, 
Facebook, and Google. To get a sense of which image fits best, one can look at the yearly 
list put together by Forbes of the 400 wealthiest Americans (who account for 2.5% of 
the 16,000 households in the top 0.01% and have an average wealth of about $400 mil-
lion). In that list, about one-third has inherited a substantial proportion of their wealth, 
and two-thirds are mostly self-made entrepreneurs and high level executives.
Why have these entrepreneurs and executives become so rich? Piketty points to bad 
corporate governance—company boards who grant their chief executives exorbitant pay 
packages. Above a certain level, he argues, it is hard to find in the data any link between 
To be in the top 1% in the 
United States in 2014, a 
household had to earn more 
than $408,000. To be in the 
top 0.1%, it had to earn more 
than $1.6 million. To be in 
the top 0.01%, it had to earn 
more than $7.8 million.
c
0.07
0.09
0.11
0.13
0.15
0.17
Percent
0.19
0.21
0.23
0.25
1913
1917
1921
1925
1929
1933
1937
1941
1945
1949
1953
1957
1961
1965
1969
1973
1977
1981
1985
1989
1993
1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
Top 1%
Bottom 50%
Figure 13-3
The Evolution of the Top 
1% and the Bottom 50% 
Income Shares in the 
United States since 1913
Source: World Inequality 
Database. https://wid.world/


=== PAGE 75 ===
 
Chapter 13 
The Challenges of Growth 
275
pay and performance. Although there is plenty of anecdotal evidence for such excesses, 
another factor is clearly at work, and it is again the nature of technological progress. 
Many new sectors exhibit strong increasing returns to scale: their costs are largely fixed 
costs and do not depend very much on the number of users. Thus, the more users there 
are, the smaller the cost per user. The result is the emergence of very large firms with 
a very large number of customers. At the end of 2018, the number of Facebook users 
was 2.3 billion, and the number of subscribers to Amazon Prime was 100 million. The 
same is true in finance, where the largest funds often manage hundreds of billions or 
even trillions of dollars. At the end of 2018, BlackRock, the largest asset management 
fund, managed $6 trillion of assets. Given the size of these firms and the size of their prof-
its, it is not surprising that the founders and the top executives have such large income 
and large wealth.
Growth and Inequality
Is it possible for countries to sustain growth without having ever-increasing inequal-
ity? The trends we just saw are not reassuring. But there are two reasons to not be too 
pessimistic.
The first is that not all advanced economies are like the United States. Wage inequal-
ity and the share of the top 1% have been rising in most countries, but typically much 
less than in the United States. The second is that we must distinguish between market 
income inequality, which is income inequality before taxes and transfers, and dis-
posable income inequality, which is income after taxes and transfers. So far, we have 
looked at market inequality, but what matters in the end is disposable income inequality. 
And here again, not all advanced economies are like the United States.
Figure 13-4, which compares the evolution of both types of inequality in the United 
States and in France, makes these points clearly. It plots the evolution of a standard mea-
sure of inequality, known as the Gini coefficient, or the Gini for short. The construction 
of the coefficient is explained in the Focus Box “Inequality and the Gini Coefficient,” but 
its general characteristics are simple: the coefficient ranges between 0 and 1. A coefficient 
of 0 means complete equality, with everybody having the same income; a coefficient of 1 
means complete inequality, with one person receiving all the income, and everybody else 
receiving nothing. (In practice, the coefficient ranges from 0.2 for the most equal coun-
tries to 0.6 for the most unequal.)
The name comes from 
Corrado Gini, an Italian 
statistician who developed 
the coefficient in the early 
part of the 20th century.
b
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
1980s
1990s
2000s
2010s
France Market
France disposable
US market
US disposable
Figure 13-4
The Evolution of 
Gini Coefficients for 
Market Income and for 
Disposable Income in 
France and the United 
States since the 1980s
Source: Income Inequality by Max 
Roser and Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, 
First published in December 
2013; updated October, 2016. 
(https://ourworldindata.org/
income-inequality).


=== PAGE 76 ===
276 
The Long Run 
The Core
The two series at the top show the evolution of the Gini coefficients for market income 
inequality for the United States in red and for France in blue. The Gini for the United States 
goes up over time, reflecting the wage and top 1% income increasing inequalities we dis-
cussed earlier. The Gini for France, however, remains roughly constant. This is an impor-
tant fact as both countries are affected in similar ways by globalization and have access 
to the same technologies. This suggests that, beyond trade and technological progress, 
other factors such as institutions and social norms about “acceptable pay” influence 
market inequality.
The two series at the bottom show the evolution of the Gini coefficients for disposable 
income inequality for the two countries. Again, there is a striking contrast between them. 
While the Gini coefficient for the United States goes up, by about half of the increase in 
the market Gini coefficient, the Gini coefficient for France is lower today than it was in 
the 1980s. In other words, redistribution through taxes and transfers has led to a (small) 
decrease in inequality. This is also an important fact. It suggests that, until now, redis-
tribution has been enough to limit inequality. (The Gini coefficient is a simple but rough 
measure, and the fact that it has decreased does not imply that all groups have benefited 
equally from growth; some workers or groups of workers have seen a relative decrease in 
income.)
There are strong moral reasons to want to limit inequality, to achieve what is known 
as inclusive growth. There are also good political reasons for governments to do so. The 
evidence suggests that perceived inequality, be it about relative wages or about 1%, has 
played a role in the rise of populism in many countries. What can governments do?
For example, looking at 
banks of the same size, 
French bankers are paid 
much less than their 
American counterparts. c
Inequality and the Gini Coefficient
The Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality. The best way 
to describe it is with the picture below. The share of popula-
tion ranked by increasing income is plotted on the horizontal 
axis, from zero to one. The share of income is plotted on the 
vertical axis, from zero to one. The relation giving the share 
of income associated with a given population share is given 
by the convex curve in red. The Gini coefficient is given by the 
ratio of area A to area (A + B).
To see what it implies, consider an economy where every-
body has the same income. The share of income is always 
equal to the share of population, so the relation between the 
two is given by the diagonal line. Area A is equal to zero, and 
thus the Gini coefficient is also equal to zero. Take the oppo-
site extreme and consider an economy where all the income 
goes to the richest individual. Then the relation between the 
two is a flat line covering the horizontal axis, ending with a 
jump from zero to one at the end. Area B is equal to zero, and 
so the Gini coefficient is equal to one.
These are obviously extreme and counterfactual cases, 
and Gini coefficients typically range between 0.2 and 0.6. 
In general, the more inequality, the smaller the share 
of  income going to a given share of  population. If, for 
example, inequality is such that a large proportion of  the 
population is very poor, the curve will be very flat starting 
from 0. If  inequality is such that a small proportion of 
the population is very rich, the curve will be very steep 
close to 1.
Summarizing the complexity of the distribution of 
income in one number has obvious limits. Inequality can 
take different forms, which may all lead to the same Gini 
coefficient. But it is a simple and intuitive statistic and one 
that allows comparisons of income distributions across time 
or across countries.
FOCUS
1
0
Share of population ranked from
low to high income
Share of Income
1
A
B
Figure 1


=== PAGE 77 ===
 
Chapter 13 
The Challenges of Growth 
277
They can try to reduce market income inequality, through better education, through 
minimum wages, through rules about governance within firms. Or, given market income 
inequality, they can reduce disposable income inequality through progressive taxation, 
including the use of a negative income tax to increase revenue at the low end of the wage 
distribution, and through transfers such as food stamps and unemployment benefits. All 
governments use some of these tools, and redistribution can substantially reduce inequal-
ity. Evidence from a recent OECD study is given in Figure 13-5, which shows the Gini coef-
ficients (multiplied by 100) associated with market income and with disposable income 
inequality, and by implication shows the degree of redistribution, for each OECD country.
The figure yields three conclusions.
 
■
Countries vary substantially in their degree of market inequality, with the United 
States near the top. Gini coefficients range from lows of 30% in Korea and 34% in 
Iceland to 50% in Ireland and Greece, and 48% in the United States. As most of these 
countries are open to trade and have access to similar technologies, it shows the 
importance of other factors in determining the outcome.
 
■
The degree of redistribution, defined as the difference in the market income Gini 
and the disposable income Gini, divided by the market income Gini, varies from lows 
of 5% in Chile and 10% in Korea to 38% in Finland and 40% in Ireland. The United 
States stands toward the low end, at 18%. This shows the importance of political 
choices in determining the final outcome.
 
■
As a result of redistribution, disposable income Ginis are lower than market income 
Ginis, often by a large amount. For example, in Ireland market income inequality is 
high but, as a result of redistribution, disposable income inequality is low. The varia-
tion in disposable income inequality, from 25% to 45%, is smaller than in market 
income inequality, which ranges from 30% to 50%, but it remains substantial. In the 
United States, market income inequality is high and redistribution limited.
If inequality continues to increase, governments will have to do more. This is why, 
for example, it appears that discussions about the marginal income tax rate, or higher 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
CHL
KOR
CHE
JPN
NZL
USA
ISR
LVA
EST
CAN
GBR
AUS
ITA
OECD32
ISL
ESP
SWE
NLD
DEU
POL
SVK
NOR
PRT
GRC
CZE
FRA
LUX
AUT
DNK
BEL
SVN
FIN
IRL
MEX
TUR
HUN
Percentage
Gini coefficient
Inequality before taxes and transfers
Inequality after taxes and transfers
Redistribution (in %, right axis)
Figure 13-5
Market Income, Disposable Income, and Redistribution, across OECD Countries
Source: Market income, Disposable income, and redistribution, across OECD countries. Used with Permission. https://oecde-
coscope.blog/2019/02/14/income-redistribution-across-oecd-countries-main-findings-andpolicy-implications/.


=== PAGE 78 ===
278 
The Long Run 
The Core
inheritance taxes, are likely to play an important role in the 2020 US elections, and 
why discussions about the provision of a universal income, which would give a mini-
mum amount to people whether they work or not, are taking place in countries like Italy 
or Finland. Sustaining growth while limiting or reducing inequality is one of the most 
important challenges facing policymakers today.
13-4  CLIMATE CHANGE AND GLOBAL 
WARMING
It is well known that markets work poorly when there are externalities. In the context of 
growth, a major externality is the emission of greenhouse gases. These gases have a cost 
but it is not taken into account by firms and by people when they make decisions about, 
for example, whether to choose one technology or another, or whether to buy a car.
The most important greenhouse gas is carbon dioxide (CO2). To understand its role, 
consider the light sent by the sun to the earth. Some of this sunlight is absorbed by the 
earth and some is reradiated back to space. The amount of CO2 in the atmosphere deter-
mines the strength of the “greenhouse effect”—and how much is absorbed by the earth 
and how much is reradiated. How much is absorbed is in turn a major determinant of 
the global temperature. Were there no carbon dioxide or other greenhouse gases in the 
atmosphere, too little sunlight would be absorbed, too much would be reradiated, and it 
is estimated that the global temperature would be about—18 degrees Celsius (roughly 
zero Fahrenheit). If, however, there is too much carbon dioxide, the temperature of the 
earth will increase, leading to global warming. Substantial global warming would be cat-
astrophic, leading to a large increase in sea levels, extreme weather events, and parts of 
the world becoming uninhabitable.
Since the Industrial Revolution the use of fossil fuels (primarily coal) has led to a large 
increase in CO2 emissions. At the same time, there has been a steady increase in the aver-
age global temperature. The evidence for each one is shown in Figures 13-6 and 13-7.
Figure 13-6 shows the increase in CO2 emissions since 1850, by region of the world. 
It shows a very large increase in emissions over time, starting with Europe during the 
Industrial Revolution and the United States taking the relay later. Since the 2000s how-
ever, emissions from China have exceeded the emissions of both Europe and the United 
States combined.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
1850
1856
1862
1868
1874
1880
1886
1892
1898
1904
1910
1916
1922
1928
1934
1940
1946
1952
1958
1964
1970
1976
1982
1988
1994
2000
2006
2012
USA
European Union
China
India
Other
Figure 13-6
CO2 Emissions since 
1850, by Region
Source: Annual carbon dioxide 
(CO2) emissions measured in 
 billion tons (Gt) per year. Carbon 
Dioxide Information Analysis 
Center (CDIAC), http://cdiac.ornl.
gov/CO2_Emission/.


=== PAGE 79 ===
 
Chapter 13 
The Challenges of Growth 
279
Figure 13-7 shows the increase in the global average temperature since 1850, as 
a deviation from the temperature in 1850. The temperature has increased by roughly 
1.2 degrees Celsius since 1850, with much of the increase taking place since the 
late 1970s.
The fact that both CO2 levels and the global temperature have increased is indisput-
able; only cranks (who unfortunately exist) deny it. One may, however, question whether 
the increase in global temperature is due to the increase in CO2 levels or to other factors. 
Nearly all scientists believe that the relation is indeed causal. And even it is not, global 
warming is a major concern, and limiting CO2 can alleviate the problem.
Turning from the past to the future, the main question is how fast global  warming 
is likely to happen. The consensus forecast is shown in Figure 13-8. If there were no cli-
mate policies at all, temperature would be forecast to increase, relative to its value before 
the pre–Industrial Revolution, by 4.1 to 4.8 degrees Celsius by 2100, making the planet 
largely uninhabitable. Under existing policies, the forecast is for an increase of 3.1 
to 3.7 degrees, still a catastrophic outcome. Under current pledges, the forecast is for an 
increase of 2.6 to 3.2 degrees. Pledges, however, are not binding, and the evidence is that 
many countries are not delivering. Even if they were, the pledged changes would be insuf-
ficient to limit the increase to 1.5% to 2%, the level considered acceptable by scientists.
What policies should be adopted by countries to limit the increase? There is wide 
agreement among economists that the best policy is to put a price on carbon emissions, 
in effect to internalize the externality. The reason it has not happened is probably four-
fold. First, until recently, global warming was not seen as a high priority. Indeed, some 
governments are still reluctant to accept the reality. Second, any policy that implies a cost 
today in exchange for difficult-to-assess benefits far in the future is politically difficult to 
sell. Third, because the relatively poor in each country tend to have cars that are older and 
have larger emissions, the policy, unless compensated by the right transfers, is regressive. 
Fourth, and probably most importantly, policy discussions lead to sharp tensions between 
emerging market and advanced economies. You can see why in Figure 13-6. China is 
now the main source of CO2 emissions and thus would see the largest increase in costs. It 
argues that Europe and the United States were able to grow and emit earlier in time with-
out paying this cost, and it is unfair to ask China now to pay the full cost.
Put more generally, it is difficult to achieve an agreement across all countries, 
and this has been reflected in the limited success of past climate conferences. Short of 
As I write, a statement signed 
by more than 3,000 US 
economists, including 27 
Nobel Laureates and 15 for-
mer chairs of the Council of 
Economic Advisers, argues 
for the introduction of a car-
bon tax.
b
0.2
0.4
0
20.2
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1850
1856
1862
1868
1874
1880
1886
1892
1898
1904
1910
1916
1922
1928
1934
1940
1946
1952
1958
1964
1970
1976
1982
1988
1994
2000
2006
2012
Figure 13-7
Global Average 
Temperature since 1850
Source: Met Office Hadley Center, 
www.metoffice.gov.uk/hadobs/
hadcrut4/index.html.


=== PAGE 80 ===
an agreement, a solution has been proposed by William Nordhaus, of Yale University. 
Countries willing to adopt a carbon tax should do so and impose a carbon tariff on the 
goods imported from countries that do not have a carbon tax. This would in turn give 
incentives for those countries to adopt a carbon tax and no longer be subject to tariffs. 
Whether this or another solution is adopted, the problem will not go away.
William Nordhaus received 
the Nobel Prize for his work 
on climate change in 2018.
c
160 Gt CO2e
140 Gt CO2e
100 Gt CO2e
80 Gt CO2e
60 Gt CO2e
40 Gt CO2e
20 Gt CO2e
2000
Historic
2020
2040
2060
2080
2100
1.58C pathways
28C pathways
Pledges
(2.623.28C)
Current policies
(3.123.78C)
No climate policies
(4.124.88C)
0 Gt CO2e
120 Gt CO2e
Figure 13-8
Global Warming Scenarios
Source: Max Roser, https://ourworldindata.org/uploads/2018/04/Greenhouse-gas-emission-scenarios-01.png.
SUMMARY
 
■There is a tension between the feeling of fast technological 
progress and the decrease in measured productivity growth. 
The decrease in measured productivity growth does not 
appear to be due to mismeasurement but to a true decline. 
In the past, technological progress came from the discovery 
of general-purpose technologies and their diffusion to many 
sectors in the economy. Nobody really knows whether digi-
tization, the current general-purpose technology, will have 
the same effect.
 
■The worry that technological progress will lead to mass 
unemployment is an old worry that has not proven war-
ranted in the past. Productivity is many times higher than 
it used to be and so is employment. Unemployment is low, 
even for low-skill workers. The future, however, could be dif-
ferent, and worries about robots are not necessarily wrong.
 
■Technological progress is a process of structural change. 
New products are introduced, others disappear. New firms 
are created, old firms disappear. While the process benefits 
people as consumers, it makes some of them worse off as 
workers. The evidence is that people who lose their jobs 
because their firm is not doing well end up with lower income 
for a long time. Skill-biased technological progress has led to 
increasing inequality between those with low skills or low 
education and those with more skills or more education.
280 
The Long Run 
The Core


=== PAGE 81 ===
 
Chapter 13 
The Challenges of Growth 
281
 
■Increasing inequality has also taken the form of an increase in 
the relative income and wealth of the top 1% income group. 
Part of the reason is that some of the new technologies exhibit 
increasing returns to scale, leading to the presence of large 
firms and large incomes for the founders and executives.
 
■Market income inequality varies across countries, even 
across advanced countries exposed to similar globalization 
and technological progress trends, suggesting that it depends 
also on other factors, such as institutions or social norms. 
For given market income inequality, redistribution can also 
reduce disposable income inequality. There are again large 
differences in the degree of redistribution across countries.
 
■Climate change is perhaps growth’s major challenge. The 
evidence is that the global average temperature has steadily 
increased and that this is most likely due to increased CO2 
emissions. So far, progress has been insufficient. The best 
policy would be the introduction of a carbon tax, but it faces 
difficult political and geopolitical obstacles.
KEY TERMS
general-purpose technology, 266
technological unemployment, 267
creative destruction, 269
skill-biased technological progress, 272
market income inequality, 275
disposable income inequality, 275
Gini coefficient, 275
inclusive growth, 276
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using the information in this chapter, label each of the following 
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. It is clear that the rate of technological growth has declined 
in the last decade.
b. The change in employment and output per person in the 
United States since 1900 lends support to the argument 
that technological progress leads to a steady increase in 
employment.
c. Workers benefit equally from the process of creative 
destruction.
d. In the past two decades, the real wages of low-skill U.S. 
workers have declined relative to the real wages of high-
skill workers.
e. Mismeasurement explains a large part of the decline in 
technological progress.
f. New technologies do generally displace workers with lower 
skills.
g. Innovations known as general-purpose technologies occur 
frequently.
h. The introduction of robots may actually increase total 
employment.
i. There is evidence that workers displaced by plant closures 
associated with technological change suffer a long-term 
wage loss.
2. How might the policy changes in parts a through e affect the wage 
gap between low-skill and high-skill workers in the United States?
a. Increased spending on computers in public schools.
b. Restrictions on the number of foreign temporary agricul-
tural workers allowed to enter the United States.
c. An increase in the number of public colleges.
d. Tax credits in Central America for US firms.
e. Subsidies paid to business to introduce robots into the pro-
duction process.
3. It is possible to extend the production function so that output is 
produced with labor input, N; capital input, K; and carbon-intensive 
energy input, E.
If we write a production function as Y = N11>32K11>32E11>32
a. Using the input values below, does this production function 
exhibit constant returns to scale?
Units of N
Units of K
Units of E
Output
27
125
64
54
250
128
81
375
192
b. Solve for the necessary amount of energy to produce the 
specified level of output in each row below using the pro-
duction function Y = N11>32K11>32E11>32
Units of N
Units of K
Units of E
Output
54
250
120
54
375
120
81
250
120
c. Comment on the following statement using your results 
from part b.
“Because of constant returns to scale, in order for output 
to rise, we must increase our consumption of energy.”


=== PAGE 82 ===
282 
The Long Run 
The Core
d. Use words to describe how output can increase without an 
increase in the use of energy. The text points out that there 
is widespread agreement among economists that a tax on 
carbon emissions energy is the best way to reduce carbon 
emissions. How does this proposition fit into the produc-
tion function above?
DIG DEEPER
4. Changes in the rate of technological growth
In Chapter 12 you computed a residual term representing the 
growth rate of technology using the expression
residual K gY - 3agN + (1 - a)gK4
and the annual growth rates of output, gY; labor input, gN; and 
capital input, gK. What was the value of that residual for the period 
from 2000 to 2014?.
From the Penn World Tables, fill in the chart below:
Reminder: Use rgdpo for output (2011 US dollars); emp 
number of employees labor input; ck for the capital stock (2011 US 
dollars). The share of labor is labsh.
Year 1985
Year 1999
Y
N
K
Share
of labor
Y
N
K
Share  
of labor
United States
Compute growth rates of Y, N, and K between 1985 and 1999. 
Do the same calculation for the period from 2000 to 2014 or 
use your results from Chapter 12.
a. Compare the growth rate of technology in the periods 
1985–1999 and 2000–2014.
b. The FRED database provides the following variable as a 
measure of the unemployment rate of a low-skill group 
of labor force participants: High school graduates with 
no college aged 16–24 (series LNU04023068). This data 
begins in 1985. Find this series and describe the graph 
of this series from 1985 to 2018 (or the latest date avail-
able). What happened to the unemployment rate of this 
group from 2009 to 2013? Then download the series to 
a spreadsheet.
c. Now calculate the average unemployment rate of this 
group over these three periods: 1985–1999, 2000 to the 
end of the data, and 2017 to the end of your data. How 
do the three unemployment rates compare? Does your 
result support the proposition that more rapid techno-
logical change increases the unemployment rate of low-
skill workers? Explain why you also looked at the years 
after 2017.
5. Technological progress, agriculture, and employment
Discuss the following statement: “Those who argue that techno-
logical progress does not reduce employment should look at 
agriculture. At the start of the last century, there were more 
than 11 million farm workers. Today, there are fewer than 1 
million. If all sectors start having the productivity growth that 
took place in agriculture during the 20th century, no one will 
be employed a century from now.”
6. Technology and the labor market
In the appendix to Chapter 7, we learned how the wage-setting 
and price-setting equations could be expressed in terms of labor 
demand and labor supply. In this problem, we extend the analysis to 
account for technological change.
Consider the wage-setting equation
W>P = F(u, z)
as the equation corresponding to labor supply. Recall that for a 
given labor force, L, the unemployment rate, u, can be written as
u = 1 - N>L
where N is employment.
a. Substitute the expression for u into the wage-setting 
equation.
b. Using the relation you derived in part a, graph the labor 
supply curve in a diagram with N on the horizontal axis 
and W>P, the real wage, on the vertical axis.
Now write the price setting equation as
P = (1 + m)MC
where MC is the marginal cost of production. To general-
ize somewhat our discussion in the text, we shall write
MC = W>MPL
where W is the wage and MPL is the marginal product of 
labor.
c. Substitute the expression for MC into the price-setting 
equation and solve for the real wage, W>P. The result is the 
labor demand relation, with W>P as a function of the MPL 
and the markup, m.
In the text, we assumed for simplicity that the MPL was con-
stant for a given level of technology. Here, we assume that the MPL 
decreases with employment (again for a given level of technology), 
a more realistic assumption.
d. Assuming that the MPL decreases with employment, 
graph the labor demand relation you derived in part c. Use 
the same diagram you drew for part b.
e. What happens to the labor demand curve if the level 
of technology improves? (Hint: What happens to 
MPL when technology improves?) Explain. How is 
the real wage affected by an increase in the level of 
technology?
EXPLORE FURTHER
7. The churn
The Bureau of Labor Statistics presents a forecast of occu-
pations with the largest job decline and the largest job growth. 
Examine the table at https://www.bls.gov/emp/tables/emp-by-
detailed-occupation.htm.
a. Which occupations in decline can be linked to tech-
nological change? Which can be linked to foreign 
competition?
b. Which occupations that are forecast to grow can be 
linked to technological change? Which can be linked to 
demographic changes—in particular, the aging of the US 
population?


=== PAGE 83 ===
 
Chapter 13 
The Challenges of Growth 
283
8. Real wages
The chapter has presented data on relative wages of high-skill 
and low-skill workers. In this question, we look at the evolution of 
real wages.
a. Go to the Web site of the most recent Economic Report of the 
President and find Table B-15. Look at the data on average 
hourly earnings for production and non-supervisory employ-
ees in 1982–1984 dollars (i.e., real hourly earnings) for the 
earliest and the latest data in this table. How do real hourly 
earnings in the earliest data compare to real hourly earnings 
in the latest year for which data are available? Are there periods 
in between where real hourly earnings in the private sector fell?
b. Given the data on relative wages presented in the chapter, 
what do your results from part b suggest about the evolu-
tion of real wages of low-skill workers since 1974? What 
do your answers suggest about the strength of the relative 
decline in demand for low-skill workers?
c. What might be missing from this analysis of worker com-
pensation? Do workers receive compensation in forms 
other than wages?
9. Income Inequality
a. What evidence is presented in the text that income inequal-
ity has increased over time in the United States?
b. Use supply and demand of educated workers to explain the 
increase in income inequality.
c. Use supply and demand of less-educated workers to explain 
the increase in income inequality.
d. Do a Web search and contrast, if possible, the positions 
of the Democrats and the positions of the Republicans on 
whether increased income inequality is a problem in need 
of a policy solution.
e. There is some 2011 evidence on who married whom 
by level of education at www.theatlantic.com/sexes/
archive/2013/04/college-graduates-marry-other-college-
graduates-most-of-the-time/274654/. Explain how, if like-
educated people are more likely to marry each other over 
time, this contributes to income inequality.
10. Carbon emissions and growth
There is a great deal of interest in carbon emissions because 
of global warming. The World Bank produces data on carbon emis-
sions by country in a variety of forms. It is found at
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/en.atm.co2e.
pp.gd. One very interesting series is CO2 emissions (kg per 
PPP $ of GDP). Download this data set to a spreadsheet. 
There are estimates of CO2 emissions per dollar of real GDP, 
a variable sometimes called the carbon intensity of produc-
tion. At the time of writing this data started in 1990 and 
ended in 2014.
a. Find the values for the United States. How has the carbon 
intensity of output in the United States changed from 
1990 to the most recent data?
b. Sort the data in the spreadsheet to find the countries with 
the five largest values of emissions per dollar of GDP in 
1990; in the latest year. Has the list of high emission coun-
tries changed?
c. Now reconsider the five countries with the highest inten-
sity in 1990. Have they reduced carbon intensity over this 
period?
d. Go back to the Penn World Tables and use the data on GDP 
in PPP dollars to measure if carbon emissions are higher in 
the United States in 2014 than in 1990? Are carbon emis-
sions in China higher in 1990 or in 2014?
FURTHER READINGS
 
■For more on the process of reallocation that character-
izes modern economies, read The Churn: The Paradox of 
Progress, a report by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
(1993).
 
■For a fascinating account on how computers are trans-
forming the labor market, read The New Division of Labor: 
How Computers Are Creating the Next Job Market, by Frank 
Levy and Richard Murnane (2004).
 
■For more statistics on various dimensions of inequality in 
the United States, a useful site is “The State of Working 
America,” published by the Economic Policy Institute, at 
www.stateofworkingamerica.org/.
 
■For more on innovation and income inequality you can 
read, beyond Thomas Piketty’s Capital in the XXI Century 
(2014), another piece by Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel 
Saez, “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913–
1998.” The Quarterly Journal of  Economics, 118 (1): 1–41, 
and Emmanuel Saez (2013) “Striking it Richer: The 
Evolution of Top Incomes in the United States,” mimeo 
UC Berkeley.
 
■For a more general view on technology and inequality, 
and one that comes from a slightly different  
perspective, you can also read “Technology and 
Inequality” by David Rotman, MIT Technology 
Review, October 21, 2014, available at www.
technologyreview.com/featuredstory/531726/
technology-and-inequality/.
 
■On the future of technological progress: The pessimistic 
view is presented by Robert Gordon, The Rise and Fall of 
American Growth (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
2016). A good video, summarizing his main arguments, 
is www.youtube.com/watch?v=PYHd7rpOTe8". For 
an optimistic view, read Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew 
McAfee, The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and 
Prosperity in a Time of  Brilliant Technologies (Norton and 
Company, 2014).


=== PAGE 84 ===
284 
The Long Run 
The Core
 
■On inequality: The World Inequality database is a 
major data collection with information on inequal-
ity over time and within and across countries 
in a very convenient form: https://wid.world/. 
On the 0.01% top income group, a nice sum-
mary is given by Howard Gold in http://review.
chicagobooth.edu/economics/2017/article/
never-mind-1-percent-lets-talk-about-001-percent.
 
■On climate change: The energy section of the site https://
ourworldindata.org/has a large number of datasets and 
visually outstanding graphs on climate change. The Nobel 
lecture by William Nordhaus is also worth listening to: 
www.nobelprize.org/prizes/economic-sciences/2018/
nordhaus/lecture/.


=== PAGE 85 ===
 
285
Chapter 14
Chapter 14 focuses on the role of expectations in financial markets. It introduces 
the concept of expected present discounted value, which plays a central role in the 
determination of asset prices and in consumption and investment decisions. Using this 
concept, it studies the determination of bond prices and bond yields. It shows how 
we can learn about the course of expected future interest rates by looking at the yield 
curve. It then turns to stock prices and shows how they depend on expected future 
dividends and interest rates. Finally, it discusses whether stock prices always reflect 
fundamentals or may instead reflect bubbles or fads.
Expectations
The next three chapters cover the first extension of the core. 
They look at the role of expectations in output fluctuations.
EXTENSIONS
Chapter 15
Chapter 15 focuses on the role of expectations in consumption and investment deci-
sions. It shows how consumption depends partly on current income, partly on human 
wealth, and partly on financial wealth. It shows how investment depends partly on 
current cash flow and partly on the expected present value of future profits.
Chapter 16
Chapter 16 looks at the role of expectations in output fluctuations. Starting from the 
IS-LM model, it extends the description of goods-market equilibrium (the IS relation) 
to reflect the effect of expectations on spending. It revisits the effects of monetary and 
fiscal policy on output, taking into account their effect through expectations.


=== PAGE 86 ===
This page is intentionally left blank


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 86 ===
This page is intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 87 ===
287
14
Financial Markets 
and Expectations
O
ur focus throughout this chapter will be on the role expectations play in the 
determination of asset prices, from bonds to stocks to houses. We discussed the 
role of expectations informally at various points in the core. It is now time to do it 
more formally. As you will see, not only are asset prices affected by current and 
expected future activity, but they in turn affect decisions that influence current economic 
activity. Understanding their determination is thus central to understanding fluctuations.
Section 14-1 introduces the concept of expected present discounted value, which plays 
a central role in the determination of asset prices and in consumption and investment 
decisions.
Section 14-2 looks at the determination of bond prices and bond yields. It shows how 
bond prices and yields depend on current and expected future short-term interest rates. It 
then shows how we can use the yield curve to learn about the expected course of future 
short-term interest rates.
Section 14-3 looks at the determination of stock prices. It shows how stock prices 
depend on current and expected future profits, as well as on current and expected future 
interest rates. It then discusses how movements in economic activity affect stock prices.
Section 14-4 looks more closely at the relevance of fads and bubbles—episodes in which 
asset prices (stock or house prices, in particular) appear to move for reasons unrelated to 
either current and expected future payments or interest rates.
If you remember one basic message from this chapter, it should be: Expectations 
determine bond and stock prices. 


=== PAGE 88 ===
288 
Expectations 
Extensions
14-1  EXPECTED PRESENT DISCOUNTED 
VALUES
To understand why present discounted values are important, consider the problem fac-
ing a manager who is deciding whether or not to buy a new machine. On the one hand, 
buying and installing the machine involves a cost today. On the other, the machine 
allows for higher production, higher sales, and higher profits in the future. The question 
facing the manager is whether the value of these expected profits is higher than the cost 
of buying and installing the machine. This is where the concept of expected present dis-
counted value comes in handy. The expected present discounted value of a sequence 
of future payments is the value today of this expected sequence of payments. Once the 
manager has computed the expected present discounted value of the sequence of prof-
its, her problem becomes simpler. She compares two numbers, the expected present dis-
counted value and the initial cost. If the value exceeds the cost, she should go ahead and 
buy the machine. If it does not, she should not.
The practical problem is that expected present discounted values are not directly 
observable. They must be constructed from information on the sequence of expected 
payments and expected interest rates. Let’s look at the mechanics of construction.
Computing Expected Present Discounted Values
Denote the one-year nominal interest rate by it, so lending one dollar this year implies 
getting back 1 + it dollars next year. Equivalently, borrowing one dollar this year implies 
paying back 1 + it dollars next year. In this sense, one dollar this year is worth 1 + it 
dollars next year. This relation is represented graphically in the first line of Figure 14-1.
Turn the argument around and ask: How much is one dollar next year worth this 
year? The answer, shown in the second line of Figure 14-1, is 1>11 + it2 dollars. Think 
of it this way: If you lend 1>11 + it2 dollar this year, you will receive 1>11 + it2 times 
11 + it2 = 1 dollar next year. Equivalently, if you borrow 1>11 + it2 dollar this year, 
you will have to repay exactly one dollar next year. So, one dollar next year is worth 
1>11 + it2 dollar this year.
More formally, we say that 1>11 + it2 is the present discounted value of one dollar next 
year. The word present comes from the fact that we are looking at the value of a payment 
next year in terms of dollars today. The word discounted comes from the fact that the value 
next year is discounted, with 1>11 + it2 being the discount factor. (The rate at which you 
discount, in this case the nominal interest rate, it , is sometimes called the discount rate.)
The higher the nominal interest rate, the lower the value today of a dollar received 
next year. If i = 5%, the value this year of a dollar next year is 1>1.05 ≈95 cents. If 
i = 10%, the value today of a dollar next year is 1>1.10 ≈91 cents.
Now apply the same logic to the value today of a dollar received two years from now. 
For the moment, assume that current and future one-year nominal interest rates are 
known with certainty. Let it be the nominal interest rate for this year, and it + 1 be the one-
year nominal interest rate next year.
In this section, to keep things 
simple, we ignore the issue 
of risk, which we discussed 
at length in Chapter 6. 
We return to it in the next 
section.
c
it: discount rate.
1>(1 + it): discount factor. If 
the discount rate goes up, 
the discount factor goes 
down.
c
This year
$1
Next year
$(1 1 it)
2 years from now
1
1 1 it
$
$1
1
(1 1 it) (1 1 it 1 1)
$
$1
$1
$(1 1 it) (1 1 it 1 1)
Figure 14-1
Computing Present 
Discounted Values


=== PAGE 89 ===
 
Chapter 14 
Financial Markets and Expectations 
289
If today you lend one dollar for two years, you will get 11 + it211 + it + 12 dollars 
two years from now. Put another way, one dollar today is worth 11 + it211 + it + 12 
dollars two years from now. This relation is represented in the third line of 
Figure 14-1.
What is one dollar two years from now worth today? By the same logic as before, the 
answer is 1>11 + it211 + it + 12 dollars. If you lend 1>11 + it211 + it + 12 dollars this 
year, you will get exactly one dollar in two years. So, the present discounted value of a dollar 
two years from now is equal to 1>11 + it211 + it + 12 dollars. This relation is shown in the 
last line of Figure 14-1. If, for example, the one-year nominal interest rate is the same 
this year and next and equal to 5%, so it = it + 1 = 5%, then the present discounted value 
of a dollar in two years is equal to 1>11.0522 or about 91 cents today.
A General Formula
Having gone through these steps, it is easy to derive the present discounted value for the 
case where both payments and interest rates can change over time.
Consider a sequence of payments in dollars, starting today and continuing into the 
future. Assume for the moment that both future payments and future interest rates are 
known with certainty. Denote today’s payment by $zt, the payment next year by $zt + 1, 
the payment two years from today by $zt + 2, and so on.
The present discounted value of this sequence of payments—that is, the value in 
today’s dollars of the sequence of payments—which we shall call $ Vt is given by
$ Vt = $zt +
1
11 + it2 $zt + 1 +
1
11 + it211 + it + 12 $zt + 2 + g
Each payment in the future is multiplied by its respective discount factor. The more 
distant the payment, the smaller the discount factor, and thus the smaller today’s value 
of that distant payment. In other words, future payments are discounted more heavily, so 
their present discounted value is lower.
We have assumed that future payments and future interest rates were known with 
certainty. Actual decisions, however, must be based on expectations of future payments 
rather than on actual values for these payments. In our previous example, the manager 
cannot be sure how much profit the new machine will bring, nor does she know what 
interest rates will be in the future. The best she can do is get the most accurate forecasts 
she can and then compute the expected present discounted value of profits based on these 
forecasts.
How do we compute the expected present discounted value when future payments 
and interest rates are uncertain? Basically in the same way as before, but by replacing 
the known future payments and known interest rates with expected future payments and 
expected interest rates. Formally: Denote expected payments next year by $ze
t + 1, expected 
payments two years from now by $ze
t + 2, and so on. Similarly, denote the expected one-
year nominal interest rate next year by ie
t + 1, and so on (the one-year nominal interest 
rate this year, it, is known today, so it does not need a superscript e). The expected present 
discounted value of this expected sequence of payments is given by
 
$ Vt = $zt +
1
11 + it2 $ze
t + 1 +
1
11 + it211 + ie
t + 12 $ze
t + 2 + g 
(14.1)
“Expected present discounted value” is a heavy expression to carry; instead, we will 
often just use present discounted value, or even just present value. Also, it will be 
convenient to have a shorthand way of writing expressions like equation (14.1). To denote 
the present value of an expected sequence for $z, we shall write V1$zt2, or just V1$z2.


=== PAGE 90 ===
290 
Expectations 
Extensions
Using Present Values: Examples
Equation (14.1) has two important implications:
 
■
The present value depends positively on today’s actual payment and expected future 
payments. An increase in either today’s $z or any future $ze leads to an increase in 
the present value.
 
■
The present value depends negatively on current and expected future interest rates. 
An increase in either current i or in any future ie leads to a decrease in the present 
value.
Equation (14.1) is not simple, however, and so it will help to go through some 
examples.
Constant Interest Rates
To focus on the effects of the sequence of payments on the present value, assume that 
interest rates are expected to be constant over time, so that it = ie
t + 1 = c, and denote 
their common value by i. The present value formula—equation (14.1)—becomes:
 
$ Vt = $zt +
1
11 + i2 $ze
t + 1 +
1
11 + i22 $ze
t + 2 + g 
(14.2)
In this case, the present value is a weighted sum of current and expected future pay-
ments, with weights that decline geometrically through time. The weight on a payment 
this year is 1, the weight on the payment n years from now is 11>11 + i22n. With a posi-
tive interest rate, the weights get closer and closer to zero as we look further and fur-
ther into the future. For example, with an interest rate equal to 10%, the weight on a 
payment 10 years from today is equal to 1>11 + 0.10210 = 0.386, so that a payment 
of $1,000 in 10 years is worth $386 today. The weight on a payment in 30 years is 
1>11 + 0.10230 = 0.057, so that a payment of $1,000 30 years from today is worth 
only $57 today!
Constant Interest Rates and Payments
In some cases, the sequence of payments for which we want to compute the present value 
is simple. For example, a typical fixed-rate, 30-year mortgage requires constant dollar 
payments over 30 years. Consider a sequence of equal payments—call them $z without 
a time index—over n years, including this year. In this case, the present value formula in 
equation (14.2) simplifies to
$ Vt = $z c 1 +
1
11 + i2 + g +
1
11 + i2n - 1 d
Because the terms in the expression in brackets represent a geometric series, we can 
compute the sum of the series and get
$ Vt = $z 
1 - 31>11 + i2n4
1 - 31>11 + i24
Suppose you have just won $1 million from your state lottery and have been 
presented with a 6-foot $1,000,000 check on TV. Afterward, you are told that, 
to protect you from your worst spending instincts as well as from your many new 
“friends,” the state will pay you the million dollars in equal yearly installments of 
$50,000 over the next 20 years. What is the present value of your prize today? 
Taking, for example, an interest rate of 6% per year, the preceding equation gives 
An increase in $z or an 
increase in future $ze 1  an 
increase in V
c
An increase in i or an 
increase in future ie 1  a 
decrease in V
c
The weights correspond to the 
terms of a geometric series. 
See the discussion of geomet-
ric series in Appendix 2 at the 
end of the book.
c
By now, geometric series 
should not hold any secret, 
and you should have no 
problem deriving this relation. 
But if you do, see Appendix 2 
at the end of the book.
c


=== PAGE 91 ===
 
Chapter 14 
Financial Markets and Expectations 
291
V = $50,00010.6882>10.0572 = or about $608,000. Not bad, but winning the prize 
did not make you a millionaire.
Constant Interest Rates and Payments Forever
Let’s go one step further and assume that payments are not only constant, but go on 
forever. Real-world examples are harder to come by for this case, but one example comes 
from 19th-century England, when the government issued consols, bonds that paid a fixed 
yearly amount forever. Let $z be the constant payment. Assume that payments start next 
year rather than right away as in the previous example (this makes for simpler algebra). 
From equation (14.2) we have
$ Vt =
1
11 + i2 $z +
1
11 + i22 $z + g
=
1
11 + i2 c 1 +
1
11 + i2 + gd $z
where the second line follows by factoring out 1>11 + i2. The reason for factoring out 
1>11 + i2 should be clear from looking at the term in brackets. It is an infinite geometric 
sum, so we can use the property of geometric sums to rewrite the present value as
$ Vt =
1
1 + i 
1
11 - 11>11 + i22 $z
Or, simplifying (the steps are given in the application of Proposition 2 in Appendix 2 
at the end of the book),
$ Vt = $z
i
The present value of a constant sequence of payments $z is simply equal to 
the ratio of $z to the interest rate i. If, for example, the interest rate is expected to be 
5% per year forever, the present value of a consol that promises $10 per year forever 
equals $10>0.05 = $200. If the interest rate increases and is now expected to be 10% 
per year forever, the present value of the consol decreases to $10>0.10 = $100.
Zero Interest Rates
Because of discounting, computing present discounted values typically requires the 
use of a calculator. There is, however, a case where computations simplify. This is the 
case where the interest rate is equal to zero. If i = 0, then 1>11 + i2 equals 1, and so 
does 11>11 + i2n2 for any power n. For that reason, the present discounted value of a 
sequence of expected payments is just the sum of those expected payments. Because the 
interest rate is typically positive, assuming the interest rate is zero is only an approxima-
tion. But it can be a useful one for back-of-the-envelope computations.
Nominal versus Real Interest Rates and Present Values
So far, we have computed the present value of a sequence of dollar payments by using 
interest rates in terms of dollars—nominal interest rates. Specifically, we have written 
equation (14.1):
$ Vt = $zt +
1
11 + it2 $ze
t + 1 +
1
11 + it211 + ie
t + 12 $ze
t + 2 + g
What is the present value if  
i equals 4%? 8%? (Answers: 
$706,000, $530,000)
b
Some of these consols were 
still in circulation in 2015, 
when the British government 
decided to buy them back.
b


=== PAGE 92 ===
292 
Expectations 
Extensions
where it, ie
t + 1,c is the sequence of current and expected future nominal interest 
rates and $zt, $ze
t + 1, $ze
t + 2,c is the sequence of current and expected future dollar 
payments.
Suppose we want to compute instead the present value of a sequence of real 
payments—that is, payments in terms of a basket of goods rather than in terms of 
dollars. Following the same logic as before, we need to use the right interest rates for this 
case, namely interest rates in terms of the basket of goods—real interest rates. Specifically, 
we can write the present value of a sequence of real payments as
 
Vt = zt +
1
11 + rt2ze
t + 1 +
1
11 + rt211 + re
t + 12 ze
t + 2 + g 
(14.3)
where rt, re
t + 1,c is the sequence of current and expected future real interest rates, 
zt, ze
t + 1, ze
t + 2,c is the sequence of current and expected future real payments, and Vt is 
the real present value of future payments.
These two ways of writing the present value turn out to be equivalent. That is, the 
real value obtained by constructing $Vt using equation (14.1) and dividing by Pt , the 
price level, is equal to the real value Vt obtained from equation (14.3), so
$ Vt>Pt = Vt
In words: We can compute the present value of a sequence of payments in two ways. 
One way is to compute it as the present value of the sequence of payments expressed in 
dollars, discounted using nominal interest rates, and then divided by the price level today. 
The other way is to compute it as the present value of the sequence of payments expressed 
in real terms, discounted using real interest rates. The two ways give the same answer.
Do we need both formulas? Yes. Which one is more helpful depends on the context.
Take bonds, for example. Bonds typically are claims to a sequence of nominal payments 
over a period of years. For example, a 10-year bond might promise to pay $50 each year for 
10 years, plus a final payment of $1,000 in the last year. So when we look at the pricing of 
bonds in the next section, we shall rely on equation (14.1) (which is expressed in terms of 
dollar payments) rather than on equation (14.3) (which is expressed in real terms).
But sometimes, we have a better sense of future expected real values than of future 
expected dollar values. You might not have a good idea of what your dollar income will 
be in 20 years. Its value depends very much on what happens to inflation between now 
and then. But you might be confident that your nominal income will increase by at least 
as much as inflation—in other words, that your real income will not decrease. In this 
case, using equation (14.1), which requires you to form expectations of future dollar 
income, will be difficult. However, using equation (14.3), which requires you to form 
expectations of future real income, may be easier. For this reason, when we discuss 
consumption and investment decisions in Chapter 15, we shall rely on equation (14.3) 
rather than equation (14.1).
14-2  BOND PRICES AND BOND YIELDS
Bonds differ in two basic dimensions:
 
■
Maturity: The maturity of a bond is the length of time over which the bond prom-
ises to make payments to the holder of the bond. A bond that promises to make one 
payment of $1,000 in six months has a maturity of six months; a bond that prom-
ises to pay $100 per year for the next 20 years and a final payment of $1,000 at the 
end of those 20 years has a maturity of 20 years.
The proof is given in the 
appendix to this chapter. 
Although it may not be fun, 
go through it to test your 
understanding of the two 
concepts, real interest rate 
versus nominal interest rate 
and expected present value. c


=== PAGE 93 ===
 
Chapter 14 
Financial Markets and Expectations 
293
 
■
Risk: This may be default risk, the risk that the issuer of the bond (it could be a gov-
ernment or a company) will not pay back the full amount promised by the bond. Or it 
may be price risk, the uncertainty about the price at which you can sell the bond in 
the future if you want to sell it before maturity.
Both maturity and risk matter in the determination of interest rates. As I want to 
focus here on the role of maturity and, by implication, the role of expectations, I shall 
ignore risk for now and reintroduce it later.
Some definitions first: Bonds of different maturities each have a price and an associ-
ated interest rate called the yield to maturity, or simply the yield. Yields on bonds with 
a short maturity, typically a year or less, are called short-term interest rates. Yields on 
bonds with a longer maturity are called long-term interest rates. On any given day, we 
observe the yields on bonds of different maturities, and so we can trace graphically how 
the yield depends on the maturity of a bond. This relation between maturity and yield is 
called the yield curve, or the term structure of interest rates (the word term is syn-
onymous with maturity).
Figure 14-2 gives, for example, the term structure of US government bonds on 
November 1, 2000, and the term structure of US government bonds on June 1, 2001. 
The choice of the two dates is not accidental; why I chose them will become clear later.
Note that in Figure 14-2, on November 1, 2000, the yield curve was slightly down-
ward sloping, declining from a three-month interest rate of 6.2% to a 30-year interest 
rate of 5.8%. In other words, long-term interest rates were slightly lower than short-term 
interest rates. Note that, seven months later, on June 1, 2001, the yield curve was sharply 
upward sloping, increasing from a three-month interest rate of 3.5% to a 30-year interest 
rate of 5.7%. In other words, long-term interest rates were much higher than  short-term 
interest rates.
Why was the yield curve downward sloping in November 2000 but upward sloping 
in June 2001? Put another way, why were long-term interest rates slightly lower than 
short-term interest rates in November 2000, but substantially higher than short-term 
interest rates in June 2001? What were financial market participants thinking at each 
date? To answer these questions, and more generally to think about the determination of 
the yield curve and the relation between short- and long-term interest rates, we proceed 
in two steps:
1. First, we derive bond prices for bonds of different maturities.
2. Second, we go from bond prices to bond yields and examine the determinants of the 
yield curve and the relation between short- and long-term interest rates.
We introduced earlier two 
distinctions between differ-
ent interest rates, real versus 
nominal interest rates, and 
policy rate versus borrowing 
rate (we are leaving this sec-
ond distinction aside for the 
moment). We now introduce 
a third one, short versus long 
rates. Note that this makes 
for eight combinations.
b
To find out what the yield 
curve for US bonds is at the 
time you read this chapter, 
go to yieldcurve.com and 
click on “yield curves.” You 
will see the yield curves for 
both UK and US bonds.
b
Maturity
June 2001
Yield (percent)
7
6
5
4
3
3 months
6 months
1 year
2 years
3 years
5 years
10 years
30 years
November 2000
Figure 14-2
US Yield Curves: 
November 1, 2000 and 
June 1, 2001
The yield curve, which was 
slightly 
downward 
sloping 
on November 1, 2000, was 
sharply upward sloping seven 
months later.
Source: FRED. Series DGS1MO, 
DGS3MO, DGS6MO, DGS1, 
DGS2, DGS3, DGS5, DGS7, 
DGS10, DGS20, DGS30.


=== PAGE 94 ===
294 
Expectations 
Extensions
The Vocabulary of Bond Markets
Understanding the basic vocabulary of financial markets 
will help make them (a bit) less mysterious. Here is a basic 
vocabulary review.
 
■
Bonds are issued by governments or by firms. If issued 
by the government or government agencies, the bonds 
are called government bonds. If issued by firms (cor-
porations), they are called corporate bonds.
 
■
Bonds are rated for their default risk (the risk that they 
will not be repaid) by rating agencies. The two major 
rating agencies are the Standard and Poor’s Corporation 
(S&P) and Moody’s Investors Service. Standard and 
Poor’s bond ratings range from AAA to D. In August 
2011, Standard and Poor’s downgraded US government 
bonds from AAA to AA +  (the next rating down), 
reflecting its worry about the large budget deficits. This 
downgrade created a strong controversy. A lower rat-
ing typically implies that the bond must pay a higher 
interest rate or investors will not buy it. The difference 
between the interest rate paid on a given bond and the 
interest rate paid on the bond with the highest (best) 
rating is called the risk premium associated with the 
given bond. Bonds with high default risk are sometimes 
called junk bonds.
 
■
Bonds that promise a single payment at maturity, rather 
than annual payments along the way, are called dis-
count bonds. The single payment is called the face 
value of the bond.
 
■
Bonds that promise multiple payments before maturity 
and one payment at maturity are called coupon bonds. 
The payments before maturity are called coupon pay-
ments. The final payment is called the face value of the 
bond. The ratio of coupon payments to the face value is 
called the coupon rate. The current yield is the ratio 
of the coupon payment to the price of the bond.
For example, a bond with coupon payments of 
$5 each year, a face value of $100, and a price of 
$80 has a coupon rate of 5% and a current yield 
of 5>80 = 0.0625 = 6.25%. From an economic 
viewpoint, neither the coupon rate nor the current 
yield are interesting measures. The correct measure 
of the interest rate on a bond is its yield to maturity, or 
simply yield; you can think of it as roughly the average 
interest rate paid by the bond over its life (the life of a 
bond is the amount of time left until the bond matures). 
We shall define the yield to maturity more precisely later 
in this section.
 
■
US government bonds range in maturity from a few 
days to 30 years. Bonds with a maturity of up to a 
year when they are issued are called Treasury bills 
(T-bills). They are discount bonds, making only one 
payment at maturity. Bonds with a maturity of 1 to 10 
years when they are issued are called Treasury notes. 
Bonds with a maturity of 10 or more years when they 
are issued are called Treasury bonds. Both Treasury 
notes and Treasury bonds are coupon bonds. Bonds 
with longer maturities are riskier, and thus typically 
carry a risk premium, also called the term premium.
 
■
Bonds are typically nominal bonds. They promise a 
sequence of fixed nominal payments—payments in 
terms of domestic currency. There are, however, other 
types of bonds. Among them are indexed bonds, 
bonds that promise payments adjusted for inflation 
rather than fixed nominal payments. Instead of promis-
ing to pay, say, $100 in a year, a one-year indexed bond 
promises to pay 100 11 + p2 dollars, whatever p, the 
rate of inflation that will take place over the coming 
year, turns out to be. Because they protect bondhold-
ers against the risk of inflation, indexed bonds are 
popular in many countries. They play a particularly 
important role in the United Kingdom, where, over 
the last 30 years, people have increasingly used them 
to save for retirement. By holding long-term indexed 
bonds, people can make sure that the payments they 
receive when they retire will be protected from inflation. 
Indexed bonds, called Treasury Inflation Protected 
Securities (TIPS), were introduced in the United 
States in 1997.
FOCUS
Bond Prices as Present Values
In much of this section, we shall look at just two types of bonds: a bond that promises 
one payment of $100 in one year—a one-year bond—and a bond that promises one pay-
ment of $100 in two years—a two-year bond. Once you understand how their prices and 
yields are determined, it will be easy to generalize the results to bonds of any maturity. I 
shall do so later.
Let’s start by deriving the prices of the two bonds.
 
■
Given that the one-year bond promises to pay $100 next year, it follows, from the 
previous section, that its price, call it $P1t, must be equal to the present value of a 
payment of $100 next year. Let the current one-year nominal interest rate be i1t. 
Note that we now denote the one-year interest rate in year t by i1t rather than simply 
Note that both bonds are 
 discount bonds (see the 
Focus Box “The Vocabulary 
of Bond Markets”).
c


=== PAGE 95 ===
 
Chapter 14 
Financial Markets and Expectations 
295
by it as we did in previous chapters. This is to make it easier for you to remember that 
it is the one-year interest rate. So,
 
$P1t =
$100
1 + i1t
 
(14.4)
The price of the one-year bond varies inversely with the current one-year nominal 
interest rate.
 
■
Given that the two-year bond promises to pay $100 in two years, its price, call it 
$P2t, must be equal to the present value of $100 two years from now:
 
$P2t =
$100
11 + i1t211 + ie
1t + 12 
(14.5)
where i1t denotes the one-year interest rate this year and ie
1t + 1 denotes the one-year 
rate expected by financial markets for next year. The price of the two-year bond 
depends inversely on both the current one-year rate and the one-year rate expected 
for next year.
Arbitrage and Bond Prices
Before further exploring the implications of equations (14.4) and (14.5), let us look at an 
alternative derivation of equation (14.5). This alternative derivation will introduce you 
to the important concept of arbitrage.
Suppose you have the choice between holding one-year bonds or two-year bonds and 
what you care about is how much you will have one year from today. Which bonds should 
you hold?
 
■
Suppose you hold one-year bonds. For every dollar you put in one-year bonds, you 
will get 11 + i1t2 dollars next year. This relation is represented in the first line of 
Figure 14-3.
 
■
Suppose you hold two-year bonds. Because the price of a two-year bond is $P2t, every 
dollar you put in two-year bonds buys you $1>$P2t bonds today. When next year 
comes, the bond will have one more year before maturity. Thus, one year from today, 
the two-year bond will now be a one-year bond. Therefore, the price at which you can 
expect to sell it next year is $Pe
1t + 1, the expected price of a one-year bond next year.
So for every dollar you put in two-year bonds, you can expect to receive $1>$P2t 
multiplied by $Pe
1t + 1, or, equivalently, $Pe
1t + 1>$P2t dollars next year. This is repre-
sented in the second line of Figure 14-3.
Which bonds should you hold? Suppose you and other financial investors care only 
about the expected return and do not care about risk. This assumption is known as the 
expectations hypothesis. It is a simplification. You and other investors are likely to 
care not only about the expected return but also about the risk associated with holding 
each bond. If you hold a one-year bond, you know with certainty what you will get next 
year. If you hold a two-year bond, the price at which you will sell it next year is uncertain; 
holding the two-year bond for one year is risky. As I indicated previously, I am disregard-
ing this for now but shall come back to it later.
We saw this relation in 
Chapter 4, Section 4–2.
b
1-year bonds
Year t
$1
$1 times $P e
1t11
$P2t
2-year bonds
$1
Year t 1 1
$1 times (1 1 i1t)
Figure 14-3
Returns from Holding 
One-Year and Two-Year 
Bonds for One Year


=== PAGE 96 ===
296 
Expectations 
Extensions
Under the assumption that you and other financial investors care only about 
expected return, it follows that the two bonds must offer the same expected one-year 
return. Suppose this condition was not satisfied. Suppose that, for example, the one-
year return on one-year bonds was lower than the expected one-year return on two-year 
bonds. In this case, no one would want to hold the existing supply of one-year bonds, and 
the market for one-year bonds could not be in equilibrium. Only if the expected one-year 
return is the same on both bonds will you and other financial investors be willing to hold 
both one-year bonds and two-year bonds.
If the two bonds offer the same expected one-year return, it follows from Figure 14-3 
that
 
1 + i1t = $Pe
1t + 1
$P2t
 
(14.6)
The left side of the equation gives the return per dollar from holding a one-year 
bond for one year; the right side gives the expected return per dollar from holding a 
two-year bond for one year. We shall call equations such as (14.6)—equations that 
state that the expected returns on two assets must be equal—arbitrage relations. 
Rewrite equation (14.6) as
 
$P2t = $Pe
1t + 1
1 + i1t
 
(14.7)
Arbitrage implies that the price of a two-year bond today is the present value of the 
expected price of the bond next year. This naturally raises the next question: What does 
the expected price of one-year bonds next year 1$Pe
1t + 12 depend on?
The answer is straightforward. Just as the price of a one-year bond this year depends 
on this year’s one-year interest rate, the price of a one-year bond next year will depend on 
the one-year interest rate next year. Writing equation (14.4) for next year 1year t + 12 
and denoting expectations in the usual way, we get
 
$Pe
1t + 1 =
$100
11 + ie
1t + 12 
(14.8)
The price of the bond next year is expected to equal the final payment, $100, dis-
counted by the one-year interest rate expected for next year.
Replacing $Pe
1t + 1 from equation (14.8) in equation (14.7) gives
 
$P2t =
$100
11 + i1t211 + ie
1t + 12 
(14.9)
This expression is the same as equation (14.5). This is the point. What we have 
shown is that arbitrage between one- and two-year bonds implies that the price of two-
year bonds is the present value of the payment in two years, namely $100, discounted 
using current and next year’s expected one-year interest rates.
From Bond Prices to Bond Yields
Having looked at bond prices, we now go on to bond yields. The basic point: Bond yields 
contain the same information about future expected interest rates as bond prices. They 
just do so in a much clearer way.
To begin, we need a definition of the yield to maturity. The yield to maturity on an 
n-year bond, or equivalently, the n-year interest rate, is defined as the constant annual 
interest rate that makes the bond price today equal to the present value of future pay-
ments on the bond.
I use arbitrage to denote the 
proposition that expected 
returns on two assets must 
be equal. Some finance 
economists reserve arbitrage 
for the narrower proposition 
that riskless profit opportuni-
ties do not go unexploited. c
The relation between arbi-
trage and present values: 
Arbitrage between bonds of 
different maturities implies 
that bond prices are equal to 
the expected present values 
of payments on these bonds. c


=== PAGE 97 ===
 
Chapter 14 
Financial Markets and Expectations 
297
This definition is simpler than it sounds. Take, for example, the two-year bond we 
introduced previously. Denote its yield by i2t, where the subscript 2 is there to remind us 
that this is the yield to maturity on a two-year bond, or, equivalently, the two-year interest 
rate. Following the definition of the yield to maturity, this yield is the constant annual 
interest rate that would make the present value of $100 in two years equal to the price of 
the bond today. So, it satisfies the following relation:
 
$P2t =
$100
11 + i2t22 
(14.10)
Suppose the bond sells for $90 today. Then the two-year interest rate i2t is given 
by 1100>90 - 1, or 5.4%. In other words, holding the bond for two years—until 
maturity—yields an interest rate of 5.4% per year.
What is the relation of the two-year interest rate to the current one-year  interest 
rate and the expected one-year interest rate? To answer that question, look at 
equation (14.10) and equation (14.9). Eliminating $P2t between the two gives
$100
11 + i2t22 =
$100
11 + i1t211 + ie
1t + 12
Rearranging,
11 + i2t22 = 11 + i1t211 + ie
1t + 12
This gives us the relation between the two-year interest rate i2t, the current one-year 
interest rate i1t, and next year’s expected one-year interest rate ie
t + 1. A useful approxima-
tion to this relation is given by
 
i2t ≈1
2 1i1t + ie
1t + 12 
(14.11)
Equation (14.11) simply says that the two-year interest rate is (approximately) the aver-
age of the current one-year interest rate and next year’s expected one-year interest rate.
We have focused on the relation between the prices and yields of one- and two-year 
bonds. But our results generalize to bonds of any maturity. For instance, we could have 
looked at bonds with maturities of less than a year. To take an example, the yield on a 
bond with a maturity of six months is (approximately) equal to the average of the cur-
rent three-month interest rate and next quarter’s expected three-month interest rate. 
Or we could have looked instead at bonds with maturities longer than two years. For 
example, the yield on a 10-year bond is (approximately) equal to the average of the cur-
rent one-year interest rate and the one-year interest rates expected for the next nine years.
The general principle is clear: Long-term interest rates reflect current and future 
expected short-term interest rates. Before we return to an interpretation of the yield 
curves in Figure 14-2, we need to reintroduce risk.
Reintroducing Risk
We have assumed so far that investors did not care about risk. But they do care. Go back 
to the choice between holding a one-year bond for one year or holding a two-year bond 
for one year. The first option is riskless. The second is risky as you do not know the price at 
which you will sell the bond in a year. You are thus likely to ask for a risk premium to hold 
the two-year bond, and the arbitrage equation takes the form:
1 + i1t + x = $Pe
1t + 1
$P2t
$90 = $100>11 + i2t)2 1
11 + i2t22 = $100>$90 1
11 + i2t22$100>$90 1
i2t = 5.4%
b
We used a similar approxi-
mation when we looked at 
the relation between the 
nominal interest rate and the 
real interest rate in Chapter 6. 
See Proposition 3 in 
Appendix 2 at the end of the 
book.
b


=== PAGE 98 ===
298 
Expectations 
Extensions
The expected return on the two-year bond (the right-hand side) must exceed the 
return on the one-year bond by some risk premium x. Reorganizing gives:
$P2t =
$Pe
1t + 1
1 + i1t + x
The price of the two-year bond is the discounted value of the expected price of a 
one-year bond next year, with the discount rate now reflecting the risk premium. As 
one-year bonds have a known return and are therefore not risky, the expected price of 
a one-year bond next year is still given by equation (14.8). So replacing in the previous 
equation gives:
 
$P2t =
$100
11 + i1t211 + ie
1t + 1 + x2 
(14.12)
Now, to go from prices to yields, let’s go through the same steps as before. Using 
the two expressions for the price of the two-year bond, equation (14.10) and equation 
(14.12), gives:
$100
11 + i2t22 =
$100
11 + i1t211 + ie
1t + 1 + x2
Manipulating the equation gives:
11 + i2t22 = 11 + i1t211 + ie
1t + 1 + x2
Finally, using the same approximation as before gives:
 
i2t ≈1
2 1i1t + ie
1t + 1 + x2 
(14.13)
The two-year rate is the average of the current and expected one-year rate plus a risk 
premium. Take the case where the one-year rate is expected to be the same next year as 
this year. Then the two-year rate will exceed the one-year rate by a term reflecting the risk 
in holding two-year bonds. As the price risk increases with the maturity of the bonds, the 
risk premium typically increases with maturity, typically reaching 1–2% for long-term 
bonds. This implies that, on average, the yield curve is slightly upward sloping, reflecting 
the higher risk involved in holding longer maturity bonds.
Interpreting the Yield Curve
We now have what we need to interpret Figure 14-2.
Consider the yield curve for November 1, 2000. Recall that when investors expect 
interest rates to be constant over time, the yield curve should be slightly upward sloping, 
reflecting the fact that the risk premium increases with maturity. The fact that the yield 
curve was downward sloping, something relatively rare, tells us that investors expected 
interest rates to go down slightly over time, with the expected decrease in rates more 
than compensating for a rising term premium. And if we look at the macroeconomic 
situation at the time, they had good reasons to hold this view. At the end of November 
2000, the US economy was slowing down. Investors expected what they called a smooth 
landing. They thought that to maintain growth, the Fed would slowly decrease the policy 
rate, and these expectations were what lay behind the downward-sloping yield curve. By 
June 2001, however, growth had declined much more than was expected in November 
2000, and by then the Fed had decreased the interest rate much more than investors had 
expected. Investors now expected that, as the economy recovered, the Fed would start 
increasing the policy rate. So the yield curve sloped upward. Note, however, that the yield 
Recently, the term premium 
has decreased, due to the 
use of quantitative easing 
by the Fed (more on this in 
Chapter 23) c


=== PAGE 99 ===
 
Chapter 14 
Financial Markets and Expectations 
299
curve was nearly flat for maturities up to one year. This tells us that financial markets 
did not expect interest rates to start rising until a year hence—that is, before June 2002. 
Did they turn out to be right? Not quite. In fact, the recovery was much weaker than 
expected, and the Fed did not increase the policy rate until June 2004—fully two years 
later than financial markets had anticipated.
Let’s summarize what you have learned in this section. We have focused on bonds. 
You have seen how arbitrage determines the price of bonds. You have seen how bond 
prices and bond yields depend on current and future expected interest rates and risk pre-
miums and what can be learned by looking at the yield curve.
14-3  THE STOCK MARKET AND 
MOVEMENTS IN STOCK PRICES
While governments finance themselves by issuing bonds, the same is not true of 
firms. Firms finance themselves in four ways. First, they rely on internal finance—
that is, they use some of their own profits; second—and this is the main channel of 
external finance for small firms—through bank loans (as we saw in Chapter 6, this 
channel played a central role in the crisis); third, through debt finance—bonds and 
loans; and fourth, through equity finance, issuing stocks—or shares, as stocks 
are also called. Instead of paying predetermined amounts as bonds do, stocks pay 
dividends in an amount decided by the firm. Dividends are paid from the firm’s prof-
its. Typically, dividends are less than profits because firms retain some of their profits 
to finance their investment. But dividends move with profits: When profits increase, 
so do dividends.
Our focus in this section is on the determination of stock prices. As a way of intro-
ducing the issues, let’s look at the behavior of an index of US stock prices, the Standard 
& Poor’s 500 Composite Index (the S&P index) since 1980. Movements in the S&P index 
measure movements in the average stock price of 500 large companies.
Figure 14-4 plots the real stock price index constructed by dividing the S&P index 
by the consumer price index (CPI) for each month and normalizing so the index is equal 
to 1 in 1970. The striking feature of the figure is obviously the sharp movements in the 
value of the index. Note that the index went up from 1.4 in 1995 to 3.5 in 2000, only 
to decline sharply to 2.1 in 2003. And in the Great Financial Crisis, the index declined 
from 3.4 in 2007 to 1.7 in 2009, only to recover since then, standing at 4.3 at the end 
You may want to read again 
the Focus Box on the 2001 
recession in Chapter 5.
b
Another and better-known 
index is the Dow Jones 
Industrial Average, an index 
of stocks of primarily indus-
trial firms and therefore less 
representative of the average 
price of stocks than is the 
S&P index. Similar indexes 
exist for other countries. 
The Nikkei index reflects 
movements of stock prices 
in Tokyo, and the FTSE and 
CAC 40 indexes reflect stock 
price movements in London 
and Paris, respectively.
b
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
Index; 1970 5 1.0
Figure 14-4
Standard and Poor’s 
Stock Price Index in Real 
Terms since 1970
Note the sharp fluctuations 
in stock prices since the 
mid-1990s.
Source: FRED SP500, CPIAUCSL.


=== PAGE 100 ===
300 
Expectations 
Extensions
1-year bonds
Year t
$1
$1 $D e    1 $Q e
t11
t11
$Qt
Stocks
$1
Year t 1 1
$1 (1 1 i1t)
Figure 14-5
Returns from Holding 
One-Year Bonds or 
Stocks for One Year
of 2018. What determines these sharp movements in stock prices? How do stock prices 
respond to changes in the economic environment and macroeconomic policy? These are 
the questions we take up in this section.
Stock Prices as Present Values
What determines the price of a stock that promises a sequence of dividends in the future? 
By now, I am sure the material in Section 14-1 has become second nature, and you 
already know the answer. The stock price must be equal to the present value of future 
expected dividends.
Just as we did for bonds, let’s derive this result by looking at the implications of arbi-
trage between one-year bonds and stocks. Suppose you face the choice of investing either 
in one-year bonds or in stocks for a year. What should you choose?
 
■
Suppose you decide to hold one-year bonds. Then for every dollar you put in one-year 
bonds, you will get 11 + i1t2 dollars next year. This payoff is represented in the upper 
line of Figure 14-5.
 
■
Suppose you decide instead to hold stocks for a year. Let $ Qt be the price of the stock. 
Let $Dt denote the dividend this year, and $De
t + 1 the expected dividend next year. 
Suppose we look at the price of the stock after the dividend has been paid this year; 
this price is known as the ex-dividend price—so that the first dividend to be paid 
after the purchase of the stock is next year’s dividend. (This is just a matter of con-
vention; we could alternatively look at the price before this year’s dividend has been 
paid. What term would we have to add?)
Holding the stock for a year implies buying a stock today, receiving a dividend next 
year, and then selling the stock. As the price of a stock is $ Qt, every dollar you put in 
stocks buys you $ 1>$ Qt stocks. And for each stock you buy, you expect to receive 
1$ De
t + 1 + $ Qe
t + 12, the sum of the expected dividend and the stock price next year. 
Therefore, for every dollar you put in stocks, you expect to receive 1$ De
t + 1 + $ Qe
t + 12>$Qt. 
This payoff is represented in the lower line of Figure 14-5.
Let’s use the same arbitrage argument we used for bonds. It is clear that holding a 
stock for one year is risky, much riskier than holding a one-year bond for a year (which 
is riskless). Rather than proceeding in two steps as we did for bonds (first leaving out risk 
considerations and then introducing a risk premium), let’s take risk into account from 
the start and assume that financial investors require a risk premium to hold stocks.
In the case of stocks, the risk premium is called the equity premium. Equilibrium 
then requires that the expected rate of return from holding stocks for one year be the 
same as the rate of return on one-year bonds plus the equity premium:
$De
t + 1 + $Qe
t + 1
$Qt
= 1 + i1t + x
where x denotes the equity premium. Rewrite this equation as
 
$Qt =
$De
t + 1
11 + i1t + x2 +
$Qe
t + 1
11 + i1t + x2 
(14.14)


=== PAGE 101 ===
 
Chapter 14 
Financial Markets and Expectations 
301
Arbitrage implies that the price of the stock today must be equal to the present value 
of the expected dividend plus the present value of the expected stock price next year.
The next step is to think about what determines $Qe
t + 1, the expected stock price next 
year. Next year, financial investors will again face the choice between stocks and one-year 
bonds. Thus, the same arbitrage relation will hold. Writing the previous equation, but 
now for time t + 1 and taking expectations into account, gives
$Qe
t + 1 =
$De
t + 2
11 + ie
1t + 1 + x2 +
$Qe
t + 2
11 + ie
1t + 1 + x2
The expected price next year is simply the present value next year of the sum of the 
expected dividend and price two years from now. Replacing the expected price $Qe
t + 1 in 
equation (14.14) gives
$Qt =
$De
t + 1
11 + i1t + x2 +
$De
t + 2
11 + i1t + x211 + ie
1t + 1 + x2 +
$Qe
t + 2
11 + i1t + x211 + ie
1t + 1 + x2
The stock price is the present value of the expected dividend next year, plus the pres-
ent value of the expected dividend two years from now, plus the expected price two years 
from now.
If we replace the expected price in two years with the present value of the expected 
price and dividends in three years, and so on for n years, we get
$Qt =
$De
t + 1
11 + i1t + x2 +
$De
t + 2
11 + i1t + x211 + ie
1t + 1 + x2 + g
+
$De
t + n
11 + i1t + x2g11 + ie
1t + n - 1 + x2 +
$Qe
t + n
11 + i1t + x2g11 + ie
1t + n - 1 + x2
 
(14.15)
Look at the last term in equation (14.15), the present value of the expected price in 
n years. As long as people do not expect the stock price to explode in the future, then as 
we keep replacing Qe
t + n and n increases, this term will go to zero. To see why, suppose the 
interest rate is constant and equal to i. The last term becomes
$Qe
t + n
11 + i1t + x2g11 + ie
1t + n - 1 + x2 =
$Qe
t + n
11 + i + x2n
Suppose further that people expect the price of the stock to converge to some value, 
call it $QQ, in the far future. Then, the last term becomes
$Qe
t + n
11 + i + x2n =
$Q
11 + i + x2n
If the discount rate is positive, this expression goes to zero as n becomes large. 
Equation (14.15) reduces to
$Qt =
$De
t + 1
11 + i1t + x2 +
$De
t + 2
11 + i1t + x211 + ie
1t + 1 + x2 + g
 
+
$De
t + n
11 + i1t + x2g11 + ie
1t + n - 1 + x2 + . . . 
(14.16)
A subtle point: The condition 
that people expect the price 
of the stock to converge to 
some value over time seems 
reasonable. Indeed, most 
of the time it is likely to be 
satisfied. When, however, 
prices are subject to rational 
bubbles (Section 14–4), peo-
ple expect large increases in 
the stock price in the future 
and this is when the condi-
tion that the expected stock 
price does not explode is 
not satisfied. This is why, 
when there are bubbles, this 
argument fails, and the stock 
price is no longer equal to 
the present value of expected 
dividends.
b


=== PAGE 102 ===
302 
Expectations 
Extensions
The price of the stock is equal to the present value of the dividend next year, dis-
counted using the current one-year interest rate plus the equity premium, plus the pres-
ent value of the dividend two years from now, discounted using both this year’s one-year 
interest rate and the next year’s expected one-year interest rate, plus the equity premium, 
and so on.
Equation (14.16) gives the stock price as the present value of nominal dividends, dis-
counted by nominal interest rates. From Section 14-1, we know we can rewrite this equa-
tion to express the real stock price as the present value of real dividends, discounted by real 
interest rates. So we can rewrite the real stock price as:
 
Qt =
De
t + 1
11 + r1t + x2 +
De
t + 2
11 + r1t + x211 + re
1t + 1 + x2 + g 
(14.17)
Qt and Dt, without a dollar sign, denote the real price and real dividends at time t. The real 
stock price is the present value of future real dividends, discounted by the sequence of 
one-year real interest rates plus the equity premium.
This relation has three important implications:
 
■
Higher expected future real dividends lead to a higher real stock price.
 
■
Higher current and expected future one-year real interest rates lead to a lower real 
stock price.
 
■
A higher equity premium leads to a lower stock price.
Let’s now see what light this relation sheds on movements in the stock market.
The Stock Market and Economic Activity
Figure 14-4 showed the large movements in stock prices over the last two decades. It is 
not unusual for the index to go up or down by 15% within a year. In 1997, the stock 
market went up by 24% (in real terms); in 2008, it went down by 46%. Daily movements 
of 2% or more are not unusual. What causes these movements?
The first point to be made is that these movements should be, and are for the most 
part, unpredictable. The reason why is best understood by thinking in terms of the choice 
people have between stocks and bonds. If it were widely believed that, a year from now, 
the price of a stock was going to be 20% higher than today’s price, holding the stock for 
a year would be unusually attractive, much more attractive than holding short-term 
bonds. There would be a very large demand for the stock. Its price would increase today 
to the point where the expected return from holding the stock was back in line with the 
expected return on other assets. In other words, the expectation of a high stock price next 
year would lead to a high stock price today.
There is a saying in economics that it is a sign of a well-functioning stock market 
that movements in stock prices are unpredictable. The saying is not quite right. At any 
moment, a few financial investors will have better information or simply be better at 
reading the future. If they are only a few, they may not buy enough of the stock to bid its 
price all the way up today. Thus, they may get large expected returns. But the basic idea 
is nevertheless correct. Financial market gurus who regularly predict large imminent 
movements in the stock market are quacks. Major movements in stock prices cannot be 
predicted.
If movements in the stock market cannot be predicted, if they are the result of news, 
where does this leave us? We can still do two things:
 
■
We can do Monday-morning quarterbacking, looking back and identifying the news 
to which the market reacted.
Two equivalent ways of writ-
ing the stock price: The nom-
inal stock price equals the 
expected present discounted 
value of future nominal divi-
dends, discounted by current 
and future nominal interest 
rates.
The real stock price equals 
the expected present dis-
counted value of future 
real dividends, discounted 
by current and future real 
 interest rates.
c
You may have heard that 
stock prices follow a 
random walk. This is a tech-
nical term, but with a simple 
interpretation. Something—it 
can be a molecule, or the 
price of an asset—follows 
a random walk if each step 
it takes is as likely to be 
up as it is to be down. Its 
movements are therefore 
unpredictable.
c


=== PAGE 103 ===
 
Chapter 14 
Financial Markets and Expectations 
303
 
■
We can ask “what if” questions. For example: What would happen to the stock mar-
ket if the Fed were to embark on a more expansionary policy, or if consumers were to 
become more optimistic and increase spending?
Let us look at two “what if” questions using the IS-LM model we developed earlier 
(we shall extend it in the next chapter to take explicit account of expectations; for the 
moment the old model will do). To simplify, let’s assume, as we did earlier, that expected 
inflation equals zero, so that the real interest rate and the nominal interest rate are 
equal.
A Monetary Expansion and the Stock Market
Suppose the economy is in a recession and the Fed decides to decrease the policy rate. The 
LM curve shifts down to LM′ in Figure 14-6, and equilibrium output moves from point A 
to point A′. How will the stock market react?
The answer depends on what participants in the stock market expected monetary 
policy to be before the Fed’s move:
Stock prices may go up. If the Fed’s move is at least partly unexpected, stock prices 
are likely to increase, for two reasons: First, a more expansionary monetary policy 
implies lower interest rates for some time. Second, it also implies higher output for some 
time (until the economy returns to the natural level of output), and therefore higher 
dividends. As equation (14.17) tells us, both lower interest rates and higher dividends—
current and expected—will lead to an increase in stock prices.
Stock prices may not change. If investors fully anticipated the expansionary pol-
icy, then the stock market will not react. Neither its expectations of future dividends 
nor its expectations of future interest rates are affected by a move it had already 
anticipated. Thus, in equation (14.17), nothing changes, and stock prices remain 
the same.
Stock prices may go down. If stock market participants believe that the Fed is acting 
because it knows something they don’t, namely that the economy is much worse than 
they thought, they might conclude that, on net, lower interest rates will not be enough 
to offset the bad news. They might then lower their forecasts of output and of dividends, 
leading to a decrease in stock prices.
This assumes that the policy 
rate is positive to start with, 
so the economy is not in a 
liquidity trap.
b
Output, Y
Y
Real interest rate, r
r
r
LM
IS
A
A
LM
Figure 14-6
An Expansionary 
Monetary Policy and the 
Stock Market
A monetary expansion dec-
reases the interest rate and 
increases output. What it 
does to the stock market 
depends on whether or not 
financial markets anticipated 
the monetary expansion and 
on the motives of the central 
bank.


=== PAGE 104 ===
304 
Expectations 
Extensions
Output, Y
Real interest rate, r
r
r
IS
A
LM
LM
YA
A
A
IS
Figure 14-7
An Increase in 
Consumption Spending 
and the Stock Market
An increase in consump-
tion leads to a higher level of 
output. What happens to the 
stock market depends on the 
reaction of the Fed.
An Increase in Consumer Spending and the Stock Market
Now consider an unexpected shift of the IS curve to the right, resulting, for example, 
from stronger-than-expected consumer spending. As a result of the shift, output in 
Figure 14-7 increases from A to A′.
Will stock prices go up? You might be tempted to say yes. A stronger economy 
means higher profits and higher dividends for some time. But this answer is not neces-
sarily right.
The reason is that it ignores the response of the Fed. If the market expects that 
the Fed will not respond and will keep the real policy rate unchanged at r, output will 
increase a lot, as the economy moves to A′. With unchanged interest rates and higher 
output, stock prices go up. 
The Fed’s behavior however is what financial investors often care about the most. 
After receiving the news of unexpectedly strong economic activity, the main question on 
Wall Street is: How will the Fed react?
What will happen if the market expects that the Fed might worry that an 
increase in output above YA may lead to an increase in inflation? This will be the case 
if YA was already close to the natural level of output. In this case, a further increase 
in output would lead to an increase in inflation, something that the Fed wants to 
avoid. A decision by the Fed to counteract the rightward shift of the IS curve with 
an increase in the policy rate causes the LM curve to shift up, from LM to LM′, so the 
economy goes from A to A″ and output does not change. In that case, stock prices 
will surely go down: There is no change in expected profits, but the interest rate is 
now higher.
Let’s summarize: Stock prices depend on current and future movements in 
activity. But this does not imply any simple relation between stock prices and out-
put. How stock prices respond to a change in output depends on (1) what the market 
expected in the first place, (2) the source of  the shocks behind the change in  output, 
and (3) how the market expects the central bank to react to the output change. 
Test your newly acquired understanding by reading the Focus Box “Making (Some) 
Sense of  (Apparent) Nonsense: Why the Stock Market Moved Yesterday, and Other 
Stories.” Good luck!


=== PAGE 105 ===
 
Chapter 14 
Financial Markets and Expectations 
305
14-4 RISK, BUBBLES, FADS, AND ASSET 
PRICES
Do all movements in stock and other asset prices come from news about future dividends 
or interest rates? The answer is no, for two reasons: The first is that there is variation over 
time in perceptions of risk. The second is deviations of prices from their fundamental 
value, namely bubbles or fads. Let’s look at each one in turn.
Making (Some) Sense of (Apparent) Nonsense: Why 
the Stock Market Moved Yesterday, and Other Stories
Here are some quotes from The Wall Street Journal from 
April 1997 to August 2001. Try to make sense of them, 
using what you’ve just learned. (And if you have time, find 
your own quotes.)
 
■
April 1997. Good news on the economy, leading to an 
increase in stock prices:
“Bullish investors celebrated the release of market-
friendly economic data by stampeding back into stock 
and bond markets, pushing the Dow Jones Industrial 
Average to its second-largest point gain ever and put-
ting the blue-chip index within shooting distance of a 
record just weeks after it was reeling.”
 
■
December 1999. Good news on the economy, leading to 
a decrease in stock prices:
“Good economic news was bad news for stocks 
and worse news for bonds ... The announcement of 
stronger-than-expected November retail-sales numbers 
wasn’t welcome. Economic strength creates inflation 
fears and sharpens the risk that the Federal Reserve will 
raise interest rates again.”
 
■
September 1998. Bad news on the economy, leading to 
a decrease in stock prices:
“Nasdaq stocks plummeted as worries about the 
strength of the US economy and the profitability of US 
corporations prompted widespread selling.”
 
■
August 2001. Bad news on the economy, leading to an 
increase in stock prices:
“Investors shrugged off more gloomy economic 
news, and focused instead on their hope that the worst 
is now over for both the economy and the stock market. 
The optimism translated into another 2% gain for the 
Nasdaq Composite Index.”
FOCUS
Dan Wasserman Editorial cartoon/Boston Globe/TNS


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 105 ===
Making (Some) Sense of (Apparent) Nonsense: Why
the Stock Market Moved Yesterday, and Other Stories

Here are some quotes from The Wall Street Journal from
April 1997 to August 2001. Try to make sense of them,
using what you've just learned. (And if you have time, find
your own quotes.)

April 1997. Good news on the economy, leading to an
increase in stock prices:

“Bullish investors celebrated the release of market-
friendly economic data by stampeding back into stock
and bond markets, pushing the Dow Jones Industrial
Average to its second-largest point gain ever and put-
ting the blue-chip index within shooting distance of a
record just weeks afier it was reeling.”

December 1999. Good news on the economy, leading to
a decrease in stock prices:
“Good economic news was bad news for stocks

and worse news for bonds ... The announcement of

stronger-than-expected November retail-sales numbers
wasn't welcome. Economic strength creates inflation
fears and sharpens the risk that the Federal Reserve will
raise interest rates again.”
September 1998. Bad news on the economy, leading to
a decrease in stock prices:

“Nasdaq stocks plummeted as worries about the
strength of the US economy and the profitability of US
corporations prompted widespread selling.”

August 2001. Bad news on the economy, leading to an
increase in stock prices:

“Investors shrugged off more gloomy economic
news, and focused instead on their hope that the worst
is now over for both the economy and the stock market.
The optimism translated into another 2% gain for the
Nasdaq Composite Index.”

THE STOCK MARKET BOUNCED
BAC. TODAY...

[- AS WALL ST. DECIDED THE Goop
N

ENS WAG NOT AS BAD...

v= AS THE BAD NEWS
WAS G00)

D.

Dan Wasserman Editorial cartoon/Boston Globe/TNS

EZ@] Risk, BUBBLES, FADS, AND ASSET
PRICES

Do all movements in stock and other asset prices come from news about future dividends
or interest rates? The answer is no, for two reasons: The first is that there is variation over
time in perceptions of risk. The second is deviations of prices from their fundamental
value, namely bubbles or fads. Let's look at each one in turn.

Chapter 14

Financial Markets and Expectations

305


=== PAGE 106 ===
306 
Expectations 
Extensions
Stock Prices and Risk
In the previous section, I assumed that the equity premium x was constant. It is not. After 
the Great Depression, the equity premium was very high, perhaps reflecting the fact that 
investors, remembering the collapse of the stock market in 1929, were reluctant to hold 
stocks unless the premium was high enough. It started to decrease in the early 1950s, 
from around 7% to less than 4% today. And it can also change quickly. Part of the large 
stock market fall in 2008 was due not only to more pessimistic expectations of future 
dividends, but also to the large increase in uncertainty and the perception of higher risk 
by stock market participants. Thus, much of the movement in stock prices comes not just 
from expectations of future dividends and interest rates but also from shifts in the equity 
premium.
Asset Prices, Fundamentals, and Bubbles
In the previous section, we assumed that stock prices were always equal to their 
fundamental value, defined as the present value of expected dividends given in 
equation (14.17). Do stock prices always correspond to their fundamental value? Most 
economists doubt it. They point to Black October in 1929, when the US stock market fell 
Famous Bubbles: From Tulipmania in  
17th-Century Holland to Russia in 1994
Tulipmania in Holland
In the 17th century, tulips became increasingly popular in 
Western European gardens. A market developed in Holland 
for both rare and common forms of tulip bulbs.
An episode called the “tulip bubble” took place from 1634 
to 1637. In 1634, the price of rare bulbs started increasing. 
The market went into a frenzy, with speculators buying tulip 
bulbs in anticipation of even higher prices. For example, the 
price of a bulb called “Admiral Van de Eyck” increased from 
1,500 guineas in 1634 to 7,500 guineas in 1637, equal to 
the price of a house at the time. There are stories about a 
sailor mistakenly eating bulbs, only to realize the cost of his 
“meal” later. In early 1637, prices increased faster. Even the 
price of some common bulbs exploded, rising by a factor of 
up to 20 in January. But in February 1637, prices collapsed. 
A few years later, bulbs were trading for roughly 10% of their 
value at the peak of the bubble.
This account is taken from Peter Garber, “Tulipmania,” 
Journal of Political Economy, 1989, 97(3): pp. 535–560.
The MMM Pyramid in Russia
In 1994 a Russian “financier,” Sergei Mavrodi, created a 
company called MMM and proceeded to sell shares, promis-
ing shareholders a rate of return of at least 3,000% per year!
The company was an instant success. The price of MMM 
shares increased from 1,600 rubles (then worth $1) in 
February to 105,000 rubles (then worth $51) in July. And by 
July, according to company claims, the number of sharehold-
ers had grown to 10 million.
The trouble was that the company was not involved in 
any type of production and held no assets, except for its 140 
offices in Russia. The shares were intrinsically worthless. The 
company’s initial success was based on a standard pyramid 
scheme, with MMM using the funds from the sale of new 
shares to pay the promised returns on the old shares. Despite 
repeated warnings by government officials, including Boris 
Yeltsin, then president of the Russian Federation, that MMM 
was a scam and that the increase in the price of shares was a 
bubble, the promised returns were just too attractive to many 
Russians, especially in the midst of a deep economic recession.
The scheme could work only as long as the number of 
new shareholders—and thus new funds to be distributed to 
existing shareholders—increased fast enough. By the end 
of July 1994, the company could no longer make good on 
its promises and the scheme collapsed. The company closed. 
Mavrodi tried to blackmail the government into paying the 
shareholders, claiming that not doing so would trigger a 
revolution or a civil war. The government refused, leading 
many shareholders to be angry at the government rather 
than at Mavrodi. Later on in the year, Mavrodi actually ran 
for Parliament, as a self-appointed defender of the sharehold-
ers who had lost their savings. He won!
FOCUS


=== PAGE 107 ===
 
Chapter 14 
Financial Markets and Expectations 
307
by 23% in two days, and to October 19, 1987, when the Dow Jones index fell by 22.6% 
in a single day. They point to the amazing rise in the Nikkei index (an index of Japanese 
stock prices) from around 13,000 in 1985 to around 35,000 in 1989, followed by a 
decline to 16,000 in 1992. In each of these cases, economists point to a lack of obvious 
news or at least of news important enough to cause such enormous movements.
Instead, they argue that stock prices are not always equal to their fundamental 
value, defined as the present value of expected dividends given in equation (14.17), and 
that stocks are sometimes underpriced or overpriced. Overpricing eventually comes to an 
end, sometimes with a crash, as in October 1929, or with a long slide, as in the case of 
the Nikkei index.
Under what conditions can such mispricing occur? The surprising answer is that it 
can occur even when investors are rational and when arbitrage holds. To see why, con-
sider the case of a truly worthless stock (that is, the stock of a company that all financial 
investors know will never make profits and will never pay dividends). Putting De
t + 1, De
t + 2, 
and so on equal to zero in equation (14.17) yields a simple and unsurprising answer: The 
fundamental value of such a stock is equal to zero.
Might you nevertheless be willing to pay a positive price for this stock? Maybe. You 
might if you expect the price at which you can sell the stock next year to be higher than 
this year’s price. And the same applies to a buyer next year. He may well be willing to buy 
at a high price if he expects to sell at an even higher price the following year. This pro-
cess suggests that stock prices may increase just because investors expect them to. Such 
movements in stock prices are called rational speculative bubbles. Financial inves-
tors might well be behaving rationally as the bubble inflates. Even investors who hold the 
stock at the time of the crash, and therefore sustain a large loss, may have been rational. 
They may have realized there was a chance of a crash but also a chance that the bubble 
would continue and they could sell at an even higher price.
To make things simple, our example assumed the stock to be fundamentally worth-
less. But the argument is general and applies to stocks with a positive fundamental value 
as well. People might be willing to pay more than the fundamental value of a stock if they 
expect its price to increase in the future. And the same argument applies to other assets, 
such as housing, gold, and paintings. Two such bubbles are described in the Focus Box 
“Famous Bubbles: From Tulipmania in 17th-Century Holland to Russia in 1994.”
Are all deviations from fundamental values in financial markets rational bubbles? 
Probably not. The fact is that many investors are not rational. An increase in stock prices 
in the past, say due to a succession of good news, often creates excessive optimism. If 
investors simply extrapolate from past returns to predict future returns, a stock may 
become “hot” (high priced) for no reason other than its price has increased in the past. 
This is true not only of stocks but also of houses. (See the Focus Box “The Increase in 
US Housing Prices in the United States in the 2000s: Fundamentals or Bubble?”) Such 
deviations of stock prices from their fundamental value are sometimes called fads. We 
are all aware of fads outside of the stock market; there are good reasons to believe they 
exist in the stock market as well. The cartoon below makes the point nicely.
We have focused in this chapter on the determination of asset prices. The reason this 
belongs in a macroeconomic text is that asset prices are more than just a sideshow. They 
affect economic activity by influencing consumption and investment spending. There is 
little question, for example, that the decline in the stock market was one of the factors 
behind the 2001 recession. Most economists also believe that the stock market crash 
of 1929 was a major source of the Great Depression. And as we saw in Chapter 6, the 
decline in housing prices was the trigger for the Great Financial Crisis. These interactions 
among asset prices, expectations, and economic activity are the topics of the next two 
chapters.


=== PAGE 108 ===
308 
Expectations 
Extensions
The Increase in US Housing Prices During the  
First Half of the 2000s: Fundamentals or Bubble?
Recall from Chapter 6 that the trigger behind the current cri-
sis was a decline in housing prices that started in 2006 (see 
Figure 6–7 for the evolution of the housing price index). In 
retrospect, the large increase from 2000 on that preceded the 
decline is now widely interpreted as a bubble. But in real time 
as prices went up, there was little agreement as to what laid 
behind this increase.
Economists belonged to three camps:
The pessimists argued that the price increases could not 
be justified by fundamentals. In 2005, Robert Shiller said: 
“The home-price bubble feels like the stock-market mania in 
the fall of 1999, just before the stock bubble burst in early 
2000, with all the hype, herd investing and absolute confi-
dence in the inevitability of continuing price appreciation.”
To understand his position, go back to the derivation of 
stock prices in the text. We saw that, absent bubbles, we can 
think of stock prices as depending on current and expected 
future interest rates, current and expected future dividends, 
and a risk premium. The same applies to house prices. Absent 
bubbles, we can think of house prices as depending on current 
and expected future interest rates, current and expected rents, 
and a risk premium. In that context, pessimists pointed out 
that the increase in house prices was not matched by a parallel 
increase in rents. You can see this in Figure 1, which plots the 
price-to-rent ratio (i.e., the ratio of an index of house prices to 
an index of rents) since 1987 (the index is set so its value in 
January 1987 is 100). After remaining roughly constant from 
1987 to the late 1990s, the ratio increased by nearly 60%, 
reaching a peak in 2006 before declining. (It remains substan-
tially lower than the peak.) Furthermore, Shiller pointed out, 
surveys of house buyers suggested extremely high expectations 
of continuing large increases in housing prices—often in excess 
of 10% a year—and thus of large capital gains. As we saw pre-
viously, if assets are valued at their fundamental value, inves-
tors should not be expecting large capital gains in the future.
The optimists argued that there were good reasons for the 
price-to-rent ratio to go up. First, as we saw in Figure 6–2, 
the real interest rate was decreasing, increasing the present 
value of rents. Second, the mortgage market was changing. 
More people were able to borrow and buy a house. And those 
who borrowed were able to borrow a larger proportion of the 
value of the house. Both factors contributed to an increase in 
demand, and thus an increase in house prices. The optimists 
also pointed out that, every year since 2000, the pessimists 
had kept predicting the end of the bubble, and prices contin-
ued to increase. The pessimists were losing credibility.
The third group was by far the largest and remained agnos-
tic. (Harry Truman is reported to have said: “Give me a one-
handed economist! All my economists say, ‘On the one hand...
on the other.’”) They concluded that the increase in house 
prices reflected both improved fundamentals and bubbles and 
that it was difficult to identify their relative importance.
FOCUS
Figure 1
The US Housing Price-to-Rent Ratio since 1987
Source: FRED: CSUSHPISA: Case-Shiller Home Price Index. CUSR0000SEHA, Rent of Primary Residence.
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
1987-01
1988-05
1989-09
1991-01
1992-05
1993-09
1995-01
1996-05
1997-09
1999-01
2000-05
2001-09
2003-01
2004-05
2005-09
2007-01
2008-05
2009-09
2011-01
2012-05
2013-09
2015-01
2016-05
2017-09
2018-01


=== PAGE 109 ===
What conclusions should you draw? The pessimists were 
clearly largely right. But bubbles and fads are clearer to see in 
retrospect than while they are taking place. This makes the 
task of policymakers much harder. If they were sure it was a 
bubble, they should try to stop it before it gets too large and 
then bursts. But they can rarely be sure until it is too late.1
SUMMARY
 
■The expected present discounted value of a sequence of pay-
ments equals the value this year of the expected sequence 
of payments. It depends positively on current and future 
expected payments and negatively on current and future 
expected interest rates.
 
■When discounting a sequence of current and expected 
future nominal payments, one should use current and 
expected future nominal interest rates. In discounting a 
sequence of current and expected future real payments, one 
should use current and expected future real interest rates.
 
■Arbitrage between bonds of different maturities implies that 
the price of a bond is the present value of the payments on 
the bond, discounted using current and expected short-term 
interest rates over the life of the bond, plus a risk premium. 
Higher current or expected short-term interest rates lead to 
lower bond prices.
 
■The yield to maturity on a bond is (approximately) equal 
to the average of current and expected short-term interest 
rates over the life of a bond, plus a risk premium.
 
■The slope of the yield curve—equivalently, the term 
structure—indicates what financial markets expect to hap-
pen to short-term interest rates in the future.
 
■The fundamental value of a stock is the present value of 
expected future real dividends, discounted using current 
and future expected one-year real interest rates plus the 
equity premium. In the absence of bubbles or fads, the price 
of a stock is equal to its fundamental value.
 
■An increase in expected dividends leads to an increase in 
the fundamental value of stocks; an increase in current and 
expected one-year interest rates leads to a decrease in their 
fundamental value.
 
■Changes in output may or may not be associated with 
changes in stock prices in the same direction. Whether 
they are or not depends on (1) what the market expected 
in the first place, (2) the source of the shocks, and (3) how 
the market expects the central bank to react to the output 
change.
 
■Asset prices can be subject to bubbles and fads that cause 
the price to differ from its fundamental value. Bubbles are 
episodes in which financial investors buy an asset for a price 
higher than its fundamental value, anticipating to resell it 
at an even higher price. Fads are episodes in which, because 
of excessive optimism, financial investors are willing to pay 
more for an asset than its fundamental value.
1Source: “Reasonable People Did Disagree: Optimism and Pessimism about the US Housing Market before the Crash,” 
Kristopher S. Gerardi, Christopher L. Foote, and Paul S. Willen, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Discussion Paper No. 
10–5, September 10, 2010, available at www.bostonfed.org/economic/ppdp/2010/ppdp1005.pdf.
Jason Zweig.com
 
Chapter 14 
Financial Markets and Expectations 
309


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 109 ===
What conclusions should you draw? The pessimists were
clearly largely right. But bubbles and fads are clearer to see in
retrospect than while they are taking place. This makes the

task of policymakers much harder, If they were sure it was a
bubble, they should try to stop it before it gets too large and
then bursts. But they can rarely be sure until it is too late.!

‘JUST A NORMAL DAY At THE NATIONS MOST IMPORTANT FINANCIAL INSTITUTION...

SUMMARY

m The expected present discounted value of a sequence of pay-
ments equals the value this year of the expected sequence
of payments. It depends positively on current and future
expected payments and negatively on current and future
expected interest rates.

H When discounting a sequence of current and expected
future nominal payments, one should use current and
expected future nominal interest rates. In discounting a
sequence of current and expected future real payments, one
should use current and expected future real interest rates.

Arbitrage between bonds of different maturities implies that
the price of a bond is the present value of the payments on
the bond, discounted using current and expected short-term
interest rates over the life of the bond, plus a risk premium.
Higher current or expected short-term interest rates lead to
lower bond prices.

@ The yield to maturity on a bond is (approximately) equal
to the average of current and expected short-term interest
rates over the life of a bond, plus a risk premium.

m The slope of the yield curve—equivalently, the term
structure—indicates what financial markets expect to hap-
pen to short-term interest rates in the future.

Jason Zweig.com

The fundamental value of a stock is the present value of
expected future real dividends, discounted using current
and future expected one-year real interest rates plus the
equity premium. In the absence of bubbles or fads, the price
of a stock is equal to its fundamental value.

An increase in expected dividends leads to an increase in
the fundamental value of stocks; an increase in current and
expected one-year interest rates leads to a decrease in their
fundamental value.

Changes in output may or may not be associated with
changes in stock prices in the same direction. Whether
they are or not depends on (1) what the market expected
in the first place, (2) the source of the shocks, and (3) how
the market expects the central bank to react to the output
change.

Asset prices can be subject to bubbles and fads that cause
the price to differ from its fundamental value. Bubbles are
episodes in which financial investors buy an asset for a price
higher than its fundamental value, anticipating to resell it
at an even higher price. Fads are episodes in which, because
of excessive optimism, financial investors are willing to pay
more for an asset than its fundamental value.

‘Source: “Reasonable People Did Disagree: Optimism and Pessimism about the US Housing Market before the Crash,”
Kristopher 8. Geraral, Christopher L. Foote, and Paul S. Willen, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Discussion Paper No.
10-5, September 10, 2010, available at www. bostonfed. org/economic/ppdp/2010/ppdp 1005. pet.

Chapter 14

Financial Markets and Expectations 309


=== PAGE 110 ===
310 
Expectations 
Extensions
KEY TERMS
expected present discounted value, 288
discount factor, 288
discount rate, 288
present discounted value, 289
present value, 289
maturity, 292
default risk, 293
price risk, 293
yield to maturity, 293
yield, 293
short-term interest rate, 293
long-term interest rate, 293
yield curve, 293
term structure of interest rates, 293
government bonds, 294
corporate bonds, 294
bond ratings, 294
risk premium, 294
junk bonds, 294
discount bonds, 294
face value, 294
coupon bonds, 294
coupon payments, 294
coupon rate, 294
current yield, 294
life (of a bond), 294
Treasury bills (T-bills), 294
Treasury notes, 294
Treasury bonds, 294
term premium, 294
indexed bonds, 294
Treasury Inflation Protected Securities (TIPS), 294
arbitrage, 295
expectations hypothesis, 295
n-year interest rate, 296
internal finance, 299
external finance, 299
debt finance, 299
equity finance, 299
stocks or shares, 299
dividends, 299
ex-dividend price, 300
equity premium, 300
random walk, 302
fundamental value, 307
rational speculative bubbles, 307
fads, 309
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using the information in this chapter, label each of the following 
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. The present discounted value of a stream of returns can be 
calculated in real or nominal terms.
b. The higher the one-year interest rate, the lower the present 
discounted value of a payment next year.
c. One-year interest rates are normally expected to be con-
stant over time.
d. Bonds are a claim to a sequence of constant payments over 
a number of years.
e. Stocks are a claim to a sequence of dividend payments over 
a number of years.
f. House prices are a claim to a sequence of expected future 
rents over a number of years.
g. The yield curve normally slopes up.
h. All assets held for one year should have the same expected 
rate of return.
i. In a bubble, the value of the asset is the expected present 
value of its future returns.
j. The overall real value of the stock market does not fluctu-
ate very much over a year.
k. Indexed bonds protect the holder against unexpected 
inflation.
2. For which of the problems listed in parts a through c would you 
want to use real payments and real interest rates, and for which 
would you want to use nominal payments and nominal interest 
rates to compute the expected present discounted value? In each 
case, explain why.
a. Estimating the present discounted value of the profits from 
an investment in a new machine.
b. Estimating the present value of a 20-year US Treasury 
bond.
c. Deciding whether to buy or lease a car.
3. Compute the two-year nominal interest rate using the exact for-
mula and the approximation formula for each set of assumptions 
listed in parts a through c.
a. it = 2%; ie
t + 1 = 3%
b. it = 2%; ie
t + 1 = 10%
c. it = 2%; ie
t + 1 = 3%. The term premium on a two-year 
bond is 1%.
4. The equity premium and the value of stocks
a. Explain why, in equation (14.14), it is important that the 
stock is ex-dividend, that is, it has just paid its dividend and 
is expected to pay its next dividend in one year.
b. Using of equation (14.14), explain the contribution of 
each component to today’s stock price.


=== PAGE 111 ===
 
Chapter 14 
Financial Markets and Expectations 
311
c. If the risk premium is larger, all else being equal, what hap-
pens to the price of the stock today?
d. If the one-period interest rate increases, what happens to 
the price of the stock today?
e. If the expected value of the stock at the beginning of period 
t + 1 increases, what happens to the value of the stock 
today?
f. Now 
look 
carefully 
at 
equation 
(14.15). 
Set 
i1t = i1t + n = 0.05 for all n. Set x = 0.03. Compute the 
coefficients on $De
t + 3 and $De
t + 10. Compare the effect of a 
$1 expected increase in a dividend 3 years from now and 
10 years from now.
g. Repeat the computation in part f with i1t = i1t + n = 0.08 
for all n and x = 0.05.
5. Approximating the price of long-term bonds
The present value of an infinite stream of dollar payments of 
$z (that starts next year) is $z/i when the nominal interest rate, i, 
is constant. This formula gives the price of a consol—a bond paying 
a fixed nominal payment each year, forever. It is also a good approxi-
mation for the present discounted value of a stream of constant 
payments over long but not infinite periods, as long as i is constant. 
Let’s examine how close the approximation is.
a. Suppose that i = 10%. Let $z = 100. What is the present 
value of the consol?
b. If i = 10%, what is the expected present discounted value 
of a bond that pays $z over the next 10 years? 20 years? 30 
years? 60 years? (Hint: Use the formula from the chapter 
but remember to adjust for the first payment.)
c. Repeat the calculations in parts a and b for i = 2% 
and i = 5%.
6. Monetary policy and the stock market
Assume the short term real policy rate, current and expected, had 
been 2% until now. Suppose the Fed decides to tighten monetary policy 
and increase the short-term policy rate (r1t) from 2% to 3%.
a. What happens to stock prices if the change in r1t is 
expected to be temporary, that is, last for only one period? 
Assume that expected real dividends do not change. Use 
equation (14.17).
b. What happens to stock prices if the change in r1t is 
expected to be permanent, that is, is expected to persist? 
Assume that expected real dividends do not change. Use 
equation (14.17).
c. What happens to stock prices today if the increase in the 
real interest rate, current and expected, reflects an increase 
in expected future output and expected future dividends?
DIG DEEPER
7. Regular IRAs versus Roth IRAs
You want to save $2,000 today for retirement in 40 years. 
You have to choose between the two plans listed in (i) and (ii).
i. Pay no taxes today, put the money in an interest-yielding 
account, and pay taxes equal to 20% of the total amount 
withdrawn at retirement. (In the United States, such 
an account is known as a regular individual retirement 
account [IRA].)
ii. Pay taxes equivalent to 30% of the investment amount 
today, put the remainder in an interest-yielding account, 
and pay no taxes when you withdraw your funds at retire-
ment. (In the United States, this is known as a Roth IRA.)
a. What is the expected present discounted value of each 
of these plans if the real interest rate is 1%? 10%?
b. Which plan would you choose in each case?
8. House prices and bubbles
Houses can be thought of as assets with a fundamental value 
equal to the expected present discounted value of their future real rents.
a. Would you prefer to use real payments and real interest 
rates to value a house or nominal payments and nominal 
interest rates?
b. The rent on a house, whether you live in the house yourself 
and thus save paying the rent to an owner, or whether you 
own the house and rent it, is like the dividend on a stock. 
Write the equivalent of equation (14.17) for a house.
c. Why would low interest rates help explain an increase in 
the price-to-rent ratio?
d. If housing is perceived as a safer investment, what will hap-
pen to the price-to-rent ratio?
e. The Focus Box “The Increase in US Housing Prices: 
Fundamental or Bubble?” has a graph of the price-to-rent 
ratio. You should be able to find the value of the Case-Shiller 
home price index and the rental component of the consumer 
price index in the FRED economic database maintained at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (variables SPCS20RSA and 
CUSR0000SEHA, respectively). The graph in Fig ure 1 in this 
Focus Box ends with data from November 2018. Calculate 
the percentage increase in the home price index between 
November 2018 and the latest date available. Calculate the 
percentage increase in the rent price index from November 
2018 to the latest date available. Has the price-to-rent ratio 
increased or decreased since June 2018?
EXPLORE FURTHER
9. House prices around the world
The Economist annually publishes The Economist House Price 
Index. It attempts to assess which housing markets, by country, are 
the most overvalued or undervalued relative to fundamentals. Find 
the most recent version of this data on the Web.
a. One index of overvaluation is the ratio of house prices to 
rents. Why might this index help detect a housing price 
bubble? Using the data you are studying, in which coun-
try are house prices most overvalued by the ratio of prices 
to rents? Would this measure have helped predict the US 
housing market crash?
b. A second index is the ratio of house prices to income. Why 
might this index help detect a housing price bubble? Using 
this data, in which country are houses most overvalued 
by the ratio of prices to rents? Would this measure have 
helped predict the US housing market crash?
10. Inflation-indexed bonds
Some bonds issued by the US Treasury make payments 
indexed to inflation. These inflation-indexed bonds compensate 


=== PAGE 112 ===
312 
Expectations 
Extensions
investors for inflation. Therefore, the current interest rates on these 
bonds are real interest rates—interest rates in terms of goods. 
These interest rates can be used, together with nominal interest 
rates, to provide a measure of expected inflation. Let’s see how.
Go to the Web site of the Federal Reserve Board and get 
the most recent statistical release listing interest rates (www.
federalreserve.gov/releases/h15/Current). Find the current 
nominal interest rate on Treasury securities with a five-year 
maturity. Now find the current interest rate on “inflation-
indexed” Treasury securities with a five-year maturity. What 
do you think participants in financial markets believe the aver-
age inflation rate will be over the next five years?
FURTHER READINGS
 
■There are many bad books written about the stock market. 
A good one, and one that is fun to read, is Burton Malkiel, A 
Random Walk Down Wall Street, 12th ed. (2019, W. W. Norton).
 
■A description of some historical bubbles is given by Peter 
Garber in “Famous First Bubbles,” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives, Spring 1990, 4(2): pp. 35–54.
APPENDIX: Deriving the Expected Present Discounted  
Value Using Real or Nominal Interest Rates
This appendix shows that the two ways of expressing pres-
ent discounted values, equations (14.1) and (14.3), are 
equivalent.
Equation (14.1) gives the present value as the sum of cur-
rent and future expected nominal payments, discounted using 
current and future expected nominal interest rates:
$ Vt = $zt +
1
1 + it $ze
t + 1
 
+
1
11 + it211 + ie
t + 12 $ze
t + 2 + g 
(14.1)
Equation (14.3) gives the present value as the sum of 
current and future expected real payments, discounted using 
current and future expected real interest rates:
Vt = zt +
1
1 + rt ze
t + 1 +
1
11 + rt211 + re
t + 12 ze
t + 2 + g
 
(14.3)
Divide both sides of equation (14.1) by the current price 
level, Pt, so:
$ Vt
Pt
 = $zt
Pt
 + 
1
1 + it $ze
t + 1
Pt
 + 
1
11 + it211 + ie
t + 12 $ze
t + 2
Pt
+ g
 
(14.A1)
Let’s look at each term on the right side of equation (14.A1) 
and show that it is equal to the corresponding term in equa-
tion (14.3):
 
■Take the first term, $zt>Pt = zt, the real value of the current 
payment. So $zt>Pt is the same as zt, the first term on the right 
of equation (14.3).
 
■Take the second term:
1
1 + it $ze
t + 1
Pt
Multiply the numerator and the denominator by Pe
t + 1, 
the price level expected for next year, to get:
1
1 + it
  Pt + 1
e
Pt
  $zt + 1
e
Pt + 1
e
The fraction on the right, $ze
t + 1>Pe
t + 1, is equal to ze
t + 1, 
the expected real payment at time t + 1. The fraction in the 
middle, Pe
t + 1>Pt, can be rewritten as 1 + 31Pe
t + 1 - Pt2>Pt4. 
Using the definition of expected inflation as 11 + pe
t + 12 and 
rewriting the middle term, we arrive at:
11 + pe
t + 12
11 + it2
 ze
t + 1
Recall the relation among the real interest rate, the 
nominal interest rate, and expected inflation in equa-
tion (14.3): 11 + rt2 = 11 + it2>11 + pe
t + 12. Using this 
relation in the previous equation gives:
1
11 + rt2 ze
t + 1
This term is the same as the second term on the right 
side of equation (14.3).
 
■The same method can be used to rewrite the other terms; 
make sure that you can derive the next one.
We have shown that the right sides of equations (14.A1) 
and (14.3) are equal to each other. It follows that the terms on 
the left side are equal, so:
Vt = $ Vt
Pt
This says that the present value of current and future 
expected real payments, discounted using current and future 
expected real interest rates (the term on the left side), is equal to the 
present value of current and future expected nominal payments, 
discounted using current and future expected nominal interest 
rates, divided by the current price level (the term on the left side).


=== PAGE 113 ===
313
Expectations, 
Consumption,  
and Investment
H
aving looked at the role of expectations in financial markets, we now turn to the role 
expectations play in determining the two main components of spending—consumption 
and investment. This description of consumption and investment will be the main build-
ing block of the expanded IS-LM model we develop in Chapter 16.
Section 15-1 looks at consumption and shows that consumption decisions depend not 
only on a person’s current income but also on his or her expected future income and on 
financial wealth.
Section 15-2 turns to investment and shows that investment decisions depend on cur-
rent and expected profits and on current and expected real interest rates.
Section 15-3 looks at movements in consumption and investment over time and shows 
how to interpret those movements in light of what you learned in this chapter.
15
If you remember one basic message from this chapter, it should be: Both consump-
tion and investment decisions depend very much on expectations about the future. 


=== PAGE 114 ===
314 
Expectations 
Extensions
15-1 CONSUMPTION
How do people decide how much to consume and how much to save? In Chapter 3, we 
assumed that consumption depended only on current income. But even then, it was 
clear that consumption depended on much more, particularly on expectations about the 
future. We now explore how those expectations affect consumption decisions.
The modern theory of consumption, on which this section is based, was developed 
independently in the 1950s by Milton Friedman of the University of Chicago, who called 
it the permanent income theory of consumption, and by Franco Modigliani of 
MIT, who called it the life-cycle theory of consumption. Each chose his label care-
fully. Friedman’s “permanent income” emphasized that consumers look beyond current 
income. Modigliani’s “life-cycle” emphasized that consumers’ natural planning horizon 
is their entire lifetime.
The behavior of aggregate consumption has remained a hot area of research ever 
since, for two reasons: One is simply the sheer size of consumption as a component of 
GDP and therefore the need to understand movements in consumption. The other is 
the increasing availability of large surveys of individual consumers, such as the Panel 
Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), described in the Focus Box “Up Close and Personal: 
Learning from Panel Datasets.” These surveys, which were not available when Friedman 
and Modigliani developed their theories, have allowed economists to steadily improve 
their understanding of how consumers actually behave. This section summarizes what 
we know today.
The Very Foresighted Consumer
Let’s start with an assumption that will surely—and rightly—strike you as extreme but 
will serve as a convenient benchmark. We’ll call it the theory of the very foresighted con-
sumer. How would a foresighted consumer decide how much to consume? She would pro-
ceed in two steps:
 
■
First, she would add up the value of the stocks and bonds she owns, the value of her 
checking and savings accounts, the value of the house she owns minus the mort-
gage still due, and so on. This would give her an idea of her financial wealth and 
her housing wealth.
She would also estimate what her after-tax labor income was likely to be over 
her working life and compute the present value of expected after-tax labor income. 
This would give her an estimate of what economists call her human wealth—to 
contrast it with her nonhuman wealth, defined as the sum of financial wealth and 
housing wealth.
 
■
Adding her human wealth and nonhuman wealth, she would have an estimate 
of her total wealth. She would then decide how much to spend out of this total 
wealth. A reasonable assumption is that she would decide to spend a proportion of 
her total wealth such as to maintain roughly the same level of consumption each 
year throughout her life. If that level of consumption were higher than her current 
income, she would borrow the difference. If it were lower than her current income, 
she would save the difference.
Let’s write this formally. What we have described is a consumption decision of the form
 
Ct = C1total wealtht2 
(15.1)
where Ct is consumption at time t, and 1total wealtht2 is the sum of nonhuman wealth 
(financial plus housing wealth) and human wealth at time t (the expected present value, 
as of time t, of current and future after-tax labor income).
Friedman received the Nobel 
Prize in economics in 1976; 
Modigliani received the 
Nobel Prize in economics in 
1985.
c
From Chapter 3: 
Consumption spending 
accounts for 68% of total 
spending in the United 
States.
c
That’s not to mention the 
information about consumer 
behavior increasingly avail-
able from the internet. How 
to best use this information, 
with machine learning tech-
niques, is one of the frontiers 
of empirical research today.
c
With a slight abuse of lan-
guage, we shall use housing 
wealth to refer not only to 
housing but also to the other 
goods that the consumer 
may own, from cars to paint-
ings, and so on.
c
c
Human wealth + Nonhuman 
wealth = Total wealth


=== PAGE 115 ===
 
Chapter 15 
Expectations, Consumption, and Investment  
315
Up Close and Personal: Learning from Panel Datasets
Panel datasets show the value of  one or more variables 
for many individuals or many firms over time. We described 
one such survey, the Current Population Survey (CPS), in 
Chapter 7. Another is the Panel Study of  Income Dynamics 
(PSID).
The PSID was started in 1968 with approximately 4,800 
families. Interviews of these families have been conducted 
every year since and continue today. The survey has grown 
as new individuals have joined the original families sur-
veyed, either by marriage or by birth. Each year, the survey 
asks people about their income, wage rate, number of hours 
worked, health, and consumption.
By providing five decades of information about indi-
viduals and their extended families, the survey has allowed 
economists to ask and answer questions for which there was 
previously only anecdotal evidence. Among the many ques-
tions for which the PSID has been used are:
 
■
How much does consumption respond to transitory 
movements in income—for example, to the loss of 
income from becoming unemployed?
 
■
How much risk sharing exists within families? For example, 
when a family member becomes sick or unemployed, how 
much help does he or she get from other family members?
 
■
How much do people care about staying geographically 
close to their families? When someone becomes unem-
ployed, for example, how does the probability that he will 
migrate to another city depend on the number of his fam-
ily members living in the city where he currently lives?
For a more detailed description, see Katherine A. McGonagle 
et al., “The Panel Study of Income Dynamics: Overview, 
Recent Innovations, and Potential for Life Course Research,” 
Longitudinal 
and 
Life 
Course 
Studies, 
2012, 
3(2): 
pp. 268–284, https://psidonline.isr.umich.edu/llcs2012.pdf.
FOCUS
This description contains much truth. Like the foresighted consumer, we surely 
think about our wealth and our expected future labor income when deciding how much 
to consume today. But one cannot help thinking that it assumes too much computation 
and foresight on the part of the typical consumer.
To get a better sense of what this description implies and what is wrong with it, let’s 
apply this decision process to a problem facing a typical US college student.
An Example
Let’s assume you are 19 years old, with three more years of college before you start your first 
job. You may be in debt today, having taken out a loan to go to college. You may own a car and 
a few other worldly possessions. For simplicity, let’s assume your debt and your possessions 
roughly offset each other, so that your nonhuman wealth is equal to zero. Your only wealth 
therefore is your human wealth, the present value of your expected after-tax labor income.
You expect that your starting annual salary in three years will be around $40,000 
(in 2018 dollars) and will increase by an average of 3% per year in real terms, until your 
retirement at age 60. About 25% of your income will go to taxes.
Building on what we saw in Chapter 14, let’s compute the present value of your 
labor income as the value of real expected after-tax labor income, discounted using real 
interest rates. Let YLt denote real labor income in year t. Let Tt denote real taxes in year t. 
Let V1Ye
Lt - Te
t2 denote your human wealth; that is, the expected present value of your 
after-tax labor income—expected as of year t.
To make the computation simple, assume the real interest rate at which you can bor-
row is equal to zero, so the expected present value is simply the sum of expected labor 
income over your working life and is therefore given by
V1Ye
Lt - Te
t2 = 1$40,000210.75231 + 11.032 + 11.0322 + g + 11.032384
The first term ($40,000) is your initial level of labor income, in year 2018 dollars.
The second term (0.75) comes from the fact that, because of taxes, you keep 
only 75% of what you earn.
The third term 31 + 11.032 + 11.0322 + g + 11.032384 reflects the fact that 
you expect your real income to increase by 3% a year for 39 years (you will start earning 
income at age 22 and work until age 60).
You are welcome to use your 
own numbers and see where 
the computation takes you.
b


=== PAGE 116 ===
316 
Expectations 
Extensions
Using the properties of geometric series to solve for the sum in brackets gives
V1Ye
Lt - Te
t2 = 1$40,000210.752172.22 = $2,166,000
Your wealth today, the expected value of your lifetime after-tax labor income, is 
around $2 million.
How much should you consume? You can expect to live about 20 years after you retire, 
so that your expected remaining life today is 62 years. If you want to consume the same 
amount every year, the constant level of consumption that you can afford equals your 
total wealth divided by your expected remaining life, or $2,166,000>62 = $34,935 a 
year. Given that your income until you get your first job is equal to zero, this implies you 
will have to borrow $34,935 a year for the next three years and begin to save when you 
get your first job.
Toward a More Realistic Description
Your first reaction to this computation may be that this is a stark and slightly sinister way 
of summarizing your life prospects. You might find yourself more in agreement with the 
retirement plans described in the cartoon on the next page.
Your second reaction may be that although you agree with most of the 
ingredients that went into the computation, you surely do not intend to borrow 
$34,935 * 3 = $104,805 over the next three years. For example:
1. You might not want to plan for constant consumption over your lifetime. Instead you 
may be quite happy to defer higher consumption until later. Student life usually does not 
leave much time for expensive activities. You may want to defer trips to the Galapagos 
Islands to later in life. You also have to think about the additional expenses that will come 
with having children, sending them to nursery school, summer camp, college, and so on.
2. You might find that the amount of computation and foresight involved in the com-
putation we just went through far exceeds the amount you use in your own deci-
sions. You may never have thought until now about exactly how much income you 
are going to earn and for how many years. You might feel that most consumption 
decisions are made in a simpler, less forward-looking fashion.
3. The computation of total wealth is based on forecasts of what is expected to happen. 
But things can turn out better or worse. What happens if you are unlucky and you 
become unemployed or sick? How will you pay back what you borrowed? You might 
want to be prudent, making sure that you can adequately survive even the worst 
outcomes, and thus decide to borrow much less than $104,805.
4. Even if you decide to borrow $104,805, you might have a hard time finding a bank 
willing to lend it to you. Why? The bank may worry that you are taking on a com-
mitment you will not be able to afford if times turn bad and that you may not be able 
or willing to repay the loan. In other words, if you want to borrow this much money, 
the borrowing rate you face may be much higher than assumed in the computation.
These reasons, all good ones, suggest that to characterize consumers’ actual behavior, 
we must modify the description we gave previously. The last three reasons in particular sug-
gest that consumption depends not only on total wealth but also on current income.
Take the second reason: You may, because it is a simple rule, decide to let your con-
sumption follow your income and not think about what your wealth might be. In that 
case your consumption will depend on your current income, not on your wealth.
Now take the third reason: It implies that a safe rule may be to consume no more 
than your current income. This way, you do not run the risk of accumulating debt that 
you cannot repay if times turn bad.
The computation of the 
consumption level you can 
sustain is made much easier 
by our assumption that the 
real interest rate you face 
equals zero. In this case, if 
you consume one less good 
today, you can consume 
exactly one more good next 
year, and the condition you 
must satisfy is simply that 
the sum of consumption over 
your lifetime is equal to your 
wealth. So if you want to 
consume a constant amount 
each year, you just need to 
divide your wealth by the 
remaining number of years 
you expect to live.
c
One of the goals of the field 
of “behavioral economics” 
has been to assess whether 
actual behavior looks more 
like the behavior of the fore-
sighted consumer or more 
like the cartoon.
c


=== PAGE 117 ===
 
Chapter 15 
Expectations, Consumption, and Investment  
317
Or take the fourth reason: It implies that you may have little choice anyway. Even if 
you wanted to consume more than your current income, you might be unable to do so 
because no bank will give you a loan.
If we want to allow for a direct effect of current income on consumption, what mea-
sure of current income should we use? A convenient measure is after-tax labor income, 
which we introduced when we defined human wealth. This leads to a consumption func-
tion of the form
Ct = C1Total wealtht , YLt - Tt2
 
  1   +   ,   +  2 
(15.2)
Roz Chast / The New Yorker Collection/The Cartoon Bank.


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 117 ===
UNUSUAL RETIREMEWT PLANS

tick it in * my Kids" will take care of me.
I'm vietually certain: of thats

em esis)

Till take a thousand bucks, stick |
a bank, forget abeut it, and in
thiety years I'll be pleasantly surprised.

eS

Wh can plan, like, next week? Because
an asteroid could smash inte the Earth
tomorrow, so what's the point?

Roz Chast / The New Yorker Collection/The Cartoon Bank.

Or take the fourth reason: It implies that you may have little choice anyway. Even if
you wanted to consume more than your current income, you might be unable to do so
because no bank will give you a loan.

If we want to allow for a direct effect of current income on consumption, what mea-
sure of current income should we use? A convenient measure is after-tax labor income,
which we introduced when we defined human wealth. This leads to a consumption func-
tion of the form

C, = C(Total wealth, Y,, — 7,) (15.2)
( +  , +)

Chapter 15 —_ Expectations, Consumption, and Investment


=== PAGE 118 ===
318 
Expectations 
Extensions
Do People Save Enough for Retirement?
How carefully do people look forward when making con-
sumption and saving decisions? One way to answer this ques-
tion is to look at how much people save for retirement.
Table 1, taken from a study by James Poterba of MIT, 
Steven Venti of Dartmouth, and David Wise of Harvard, 
gives some basic numbers. They are based on a panel dataset 
called the Health and Retirement Study, a panel study run 
by the University of Michigan that surveys a representative 
sample of approximately 20,000 Americans over the age 
of 50 every two years. The table shows the mean level and 
the composition of (total) wealth for people aged between 65 
and 69 years in 2008—so, most of them retired. It also dis-
tinguishes between people who reach that age as singles or 
as a couple; in this case the numbers refer to the wealth of 
the couple.
The first three components of wealth capture the various 
sources of retirement income. The first is the present value of 
Social Security benefits. The second is the value of the retire-
ment plans provided by employers. And the third is the value 
of personal retirement plans. The last three components 
include the other assets held by consumers, such as bonds 
and stocks, and housing.
A mean wealth of $1.1 million dollars for a couple is 
substantial. It gives an image of forward-looking individu-
als making careful saving decisions and retiring with enough 
wealth to enjoy a comfortable retirement.
We must be careful, however. The high average may hide 
important differences across individuals. Some individuals 
may save a lot, others little. Another study, by John Scholz, 
Ananth Seshadri, and Surachai Khitatrakun, from the 
University of Wisconsin, sheds light on this aspect, also using 
data from the Health and Retirement Study. The authors 
construct a target level of wealth for each household (i.e., 
the wealth level that each household should have if it wants 
to maintain a roughly constant level of consumption after 
retirement). The authors then compare the actual wealth 
level to the target level for each household.
The first conclusion of their study is similar to the conclu-
sion reached by Poterba, Venti, and Wise: On average, people 
save enough for retirement. More specifically, the authors 
find that more than 80% of households have wealth above 
the target level. Put the other way around, only 20% of 
households have wealth below the target. But these numbers 
hide important differences across income levels.
Among those in the top half of the income distribution, 
more than 90% have wealth that exceeds the target often by a 
large amount. This suggests that these households plan to leave 
bequests and so save more than what is needed for retirement.
Among those in the bottom 20% of  the income distri-
bution, however, fewer than 70% have wealth above the 
target. For the 30% of  households below the target, the dif-
ference between actual and target wealth is typically small. 
But the relatively large proportion of  individuals with 
wealth below the target suggests that there are a number 
of  individuals who, through bad planning or bad luck, do 
not save enough for retirement. For most of  these individu-
als, nearly all their wealth comes from the present value 
of  Social Security benefits (the first component of  wealth 
in Table 1), and it is reasonable to think that the propor-
tion of  people with wealth below the target would be even 
larger if  Social Security did not exist. This is indeed what 
the Social Security system was designed to do: to make sure 
that people have enough to live on when they retire. In that 
regard, it appears to be a success.1
FOCUS
Source: James M. Poterba, Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise, “The composition and drawdown of 
wealth in retirement,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(4), pages 95–118, Fall 2011.
Table 1 
 Mean Wealth of People, Age 65–69, in 2008 (in thousands of 
2008 dollars)
Married couples
Single-person household
Social Security pension
262
134
Employer-provided pension
129
63
Personal retirement assets
182
47
Other financial assets
173
83
Home equity
340
188
Other equity
 69
18
Total
1,155
533
1Sources: James M. Poterba, Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise, “The Composition and Drawdown of Wealth in 
Retirement,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25(4): pp. 95–118. John Scholz, Ananth Seshadri, and Surachai 
Khitatrakun, “Are Americans Saving ‘Optimally’ for Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy, 2006, 114(4): pp. 607–643.


=== PAGE 119 ===
 
Chapter 15 
Expectations, Consumption, and Investment  
319
In words, consumption is an increasing function of total wealth and also an increas-
ing function of current after-tax labor income. Total wealth is the sum of nonhuman 
wealth—financial wealth plus housing wealth—and human wealth—the present value 
of expected after-tax labor income.
How much does consumption depend on total wealth (and therefore on expecta-
tions of future income) and how much does it depend on current income? The evidence 
is that most consumers look forward in the spirit of the theory developed by Modigliani 
and Friedman. (See the Focus Box “Do People Save Enough for Retirement?”) But some 
consumers, especially those who have temporarily low income and poor access to credit, 
are likely to consume their current income, regardless of what they expect will happen 
to them in the future. A worker who becomes unemployed and has no financial wealth 
may have a hard time borrowing to maintain his level of consumption, even if he is fairly 
confident that he will soon find another job. Consumers who are richer and have easier 
access to credit are more likely to give more weight to the expected future and to try to 
maintain roughly constant consumption over time.
Putting Things Together: Current Income, Expectations,  
and Consumption
Let’s go back to the importance of expectations in the determination of spending. Note 
first that, with consumption behavior described by equation (15.2), expectations affect 
consumption in two ways:
 
■
Expectations affect consumption directly through human wealth: To compute their 
human wealth, consumers must form their own expectations about future labor 
income, real interest rates, and taxes.
 
■
Expectations affect consumption indirectly through nonhuman wealth—stocks, bonds, 
and housing. Consumers do not need to do any computation here and can just take 
the value of these assets as given. As you saw in Chapter 14, the computation is in 
effect done for them by participants in financial markets. The price of their stocks, for 
example, itself depends on expectations of future dividends and interest rates.
This dependence of consumption on expectations has in turn two main implications 
for the relation between consumption and income:
 
■
Consumption is likely to respond less than one-for-one to fluctuations in current income. 
When deciding how much to consume, a consumer looks at more than her cur-
rent income. If she concludes that a decrease in her income is permanent, she is 
likely to decrease consumption one-for-one with the decrease in income. But if she 
concludes that the decrease in her current income is transitory, she will adjust her 
consumption by less. In a recession, consumption adjusts less than one-for-one to 
decreases in income. This is because consumers know that recessions typically do 
not last for more than a few quarters and that the economy will eventually recover. 
The same is true in expansions. Faced with an unusually rapid increase in income, 
consumers are unlikely to increase consumption by as much as income. They are 
likely to assume that the boom is transitory and that things will return to normal.
 
■
Consumption may move even if current income does not change. The election of a char-
ismatic president who articulates the vision of an exciting future may lead people 
to become more optimistic about the future in general, and about their own future 
income, leading them to increase consumption even if their current income does not 
change. Other events may have the opposite effect.
The effects of the Great Recession are particularly striking in this respect. Using 
data from a survey of consumers, Figure 15-1 shows the evolution of expectations 
about family income growth over the following year, for each year since 1990. Note 
How expectations of higher 
output in the future affect 
consumption today:
Expected future output 
increases
1   Expected future labor 
income increases
1  Human wealth increases
1   Consumption increases
Expected future output 
increases
1   Expected future dividends 
increase
1  Stock prices increase
1   Nonhuman wealth 
increases
1  Consumption increases
b
Looking at the short run 
(Chapter 3), we assumed 
C = c0 + c1Y (ignoring taxes 
here). This implied that, when 
income increased, consump-
tion increased less than pro-
portionately with income (C>Y 
went down). This was appro-
priate because our focus was 
on fluctuations, on transitory 
movements in income.
Looking at the long run 
(Chapter 10), we assumed 
that S = sY, or equivalently 
C = 11 - s2Y. This implied 
that, when income increased, 
consumption increased pro-
portionately with income (C>Y 
remained the same). This was 
appropriate because our focus 
was on permanent—long-
run—movements in income.
b


=== PAGE 120 ===
320 
Expectations 
Extensions
how relatively stable expectations remained until 2008, how sharply they dropped 
in 2008 and 2009, and how long they remained low after that. Only in 2014 did 
they start increasing.
The drop at the start of the crisis is not surprising. As consumers saw output 
falling, it was normal for them to expect a drop in income over the following year. But 
its magnitude is striking. Both previous recessions, in 1991 and in 2000, also had a 
drop in expected income growth, but it was much smaller and much less persistent. 
In 2008, consumers got very scared and remained scared for a long time. This led 
them to limit their consumption, and this in turn led to a slow recovery.
15-2 INVESTMENT
How do firms make investment decisions? In our first pass at the answer in the core 
(Chapter 5), we took investment to depend on the current interest rate and the current 
level of sales. We refined that answer in Chapter 6 by pointing out that what mattered 
was the real interest rate, not the nominal interest rate. It should now be clear that invest-
ment decisions, like consumption decisions, depend on more than current sales and the 
current real interest rate. They also depend very much on expectations of the future. We 
now explore how those expectations affect investment decisions.
Just like the basic theory of consumption, the basic theory of investment is straightfor-
ward. A firm deciding whether to invest—say, whether to buy a new machine—must make 
a simple comparison. It must first compute the present value of profits it can expect from 
having this additional machine. It must then compare the present value of profits to the cost 
of buying the machine. If the present value exceeds the cost, the firm should buy the machine—
invest; if the present value is less than the cost, then the firm should not buy the machine—not 
invest. This, in a nutshell, is the theory of investment. Let’s look at it in more detail.
Investment and Expectations of Profit
Let’s go through the steps a firm must take to determine whether to buy a new machine. 
(Although we refer to a machine, the same reasoning applies to the other components of 
investment—the building of a new factory, the renovation of an office complex, and so on.)
1
2
3
4
5
1990 1992
0
1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018
Expected Change in Family Income, percent,
3-month moving average
Figure 15-1
Expected Change in 
Family Income since 
1990
After falling sharply in 2008 
and 2009, expectations of 
income growth remained low 
for a long time.
Source: Survey of Consumers, 
Table 14, University of Michigan, 
https://data.sca.isr.umich.edu. 
Shaded areas denote recessions.


=== PAGE 121 ===
 
Chapter 15 
Expectations, Consumption, and Investment  
321
Depreciation
To compute the present value of expected profits, the firm must first estimate how long 
the machine will last. Most machines are like cars. They can last nearly forever, but as 
time passes, they become more and more expensive to maintain and less and less reliable.
Assume a machine loses its usefulness at rate d (the Greek lowercase letter delta) per 
year. A machine that is new this year is worth only 11 - d2 machine next year, 11 - d22 
machine in two years, and so on. The depreciation rate, d, measures how much usefulness 
the machine loses from one year to the next. What are reasonable values for d? This is 
a question that the statisticians in charge of measuring the US capital stock have had 
to answer. Based on their studies of depreciation of specific machines and buildings, 
US statisticians use numbers from 2.5% for office buildings to 15% for communication 
equipment to 55% for prepackaged software.
The Present Value of Expected Profits
The firm must then compute the present value of expected profits.
To capture the fact that it takes some time to put machines in place (and even more 
time to build a factory or an office building), let’s assume that a machine bought in year 
t becomes operational—and starts depreciating—only one year later, in year t + 1. 
Denote profit per machine in real terms by Π.
If the firm buys a machine in year t, the machine will generate its first profit in year 
t + 1; denote this expected profit by Πe
t + 1. The present value, in year t, of this expected 
profit in year t + 1 is given by
1
1 + rt
Πe
t + 1
This term is represented by the arrow pointing left in the upper line of Figure 15-2. 
Because we are measuring profit in real terms, we are using real interest rates to discount 
future real profits.
Denote expected profit per machine in year t + 2 by Πe
t + 2. Because of depreciation, 
only 11 - d2 of the machine is left in year t + 2, so the expected profit from the machine 
is equal to 11 - d2Πe
t + 2. The present value of this expected profit as of year t is equal to
1
11 + rt211 + re
t + 12 11 - d2 Πe
t + 2
This computation is represented by the arrow pointing left in the lower line of 
Figure 15-2.
The same reasoning applies to expected profits in the following years. Putting the 
pieces together gives us the present value of expected profits from buying the machine in 
year t, which we shall call V1Πe
t2  :
 
V1Πe
t2 =
1
1 + rt Πe
t + 1 +
1
11 + rt211 + re
t + 1211 - d2 Πe
t + 2 + g 
(15.3)
Look at cars in Cuba.
b
If the firm has a large number 
of machines, we can think 
of d as the proportion of 
machines that die every year 
(think of light bulbs, which 
work perfectly until they die). 
If the firm starts the year with 
K working machines and 
does not buy new ones, it will 
have K11 - d2 machines left 
one year later, and so on.
b
This is an uppercase Greek 
pi as opposed to the lower-
case Greek pi, which we use 
to denote inflation.
b
For simplicity, and to focus 
on the role of expectations 
as opposed to risk, let us 
assume again that the risk 
premium is equal to zero, so 
we do not have to carry it 
along in the formulas below.
b
t 1 1
Present value
in Year t
Year t 1 1
Expected proﬁt in:
1
1 1 rt Pe
t11
t11
t12
Pe
Year t 1 2 . . .
(1 2 d)Pe
(1 2 d)Pe
1
(1 1 rt) (1 1 r e
     )
t12
Figure 15-2
Computing the Present 
Value of Expected Profits


=== PAGE 122 ===
322 
Expectations 
Extensions
The expected present value is equal to the discounted value of expected profit next 
year, plus the discounted value of expected profit two years from now (taking into 
account the depreciation of the machine), and so on.
The Investment Decision
The firm must now decide whether to buy the machine. This decision depends on the 
relation between the present value of expected profits and the price of the machine. 
To simplify notation, let’s assume the real price of a machine—that is, the price of the 
machine in terms of the basket of goods produced in the economy—equals 1. What the 
firm must then do is to compare the present value of profits to 1.
If the present value is less than 1, the firm should not buy the machine. If it did, it 
would be paying more for the machine than it expects to get back in profits later. If the 
present value exceeds 1, the firm has an incentive to buy the new machine.
Let’s now go from this one-firm, one-machine example to investment in the economy 
as a whole.
Let It denote aggregate investment.
Denote profit per machine or, more generally, profit per unit of capital (where capital 
includes machines, factories, office buildings, and so on) for the economy as a whole by Πt.
Denote the expected present value of profit per unit of capital by V1Πe
t2, as defined in 
equation (15.3).
Our discussion suggests an investment function of the form
It = I 3V1Πe
t24
 
 1 +  2 
(15.4)
In words: Investment depends positively on the expected present value of future prof-
its (per unit of capital). The higher the expected profits, the higher the expected present 
value and the level of investment. The higher expected real interest rates, the lower the 
expected present value, and thus the lower the level of investment.
If the present value computation the firm has to make strikes you as quite similar 
to the present value computation we saw in Chapter 14 for the fundamental value of a 
stock, you are right. This relation was first explored by James Tobin, of Yale University, 
who argued that, for this reason, there should be a tight relation between investment and 
the value of the stock market. His argument and the evidence are presented in the Focus 
Box “Investment and the Stock Market.”
A Convenient Special Case
Before exploring further implications and extensions of equation (15.4), it is useful to go 
through a special case where the relation between investment, profit, and interest rates 
becomes simple.
Suppose firms expect both future profits (per unit of capital) and future interest rates 
to remain at the same level as today, so that
Πe
t + 1 = Πe
t + 2 = g = Πt
and
re
t + 1 = re
t + 2 = # # # = rt
Economists call such expectations—that the future will be like the present—static 
expectations. Under these two assumptions, equation (15.3) becomes (the derivation is 
given in the appendix to this chapter)
 
V1Πe
t2 =
Πt
rt + d 
(15.5)
Tobin received the Nobel 
Prize in economics in 1981 
for this and many other 
contributions. c


=== PAGE 123 ===
 
Chapter 15 
Expectations, Consumption, and Investment  
323
Investment and the Stock Market
20.30
20.25
20.20
20.15
20.10
20.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
21.5
21.0
20.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1962
1964
1966
1968
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
Change in ratio of
investment (scale at left)
Change in the ratio of investment to capital
(percentage points)
Change in Tobin’s q
(scale at right)
Change in Tobin’s q (lagged once)
Figure 1
Tobin’s q versus the Ratio of Investment to Capital. Annual Rates of Change since 1962
Source: Flow of Funds, Table s5a. Numerator of q: Market value of equity +  Debt +  Loans – Financial Assets,  
nonfinancial US corporations. Denominator: Nonfinancial assets of nonfinancial US corporations.
Suppose a firm has 100 machines and 100 shares outstanding—
one share per machine. Suppose the price per share is $2, and 
the purchase price of a machine is only $1. Obviously the firm 
should invest—buy a new machine—and finance it by issuing 
a share. Each machine costs the firm $1 to purchase, but stock 
market participants are willing to pay $2 for a share correspond-
ing to this machine when it is installed in the firm.
This is an example of the more general argument made by 
Tobin that there should be a tight relation between the stock 
market and investment. When deciding whether to invest, he 
argued firms might not need to go through the type of com-
plicated computation you saw in the text. In effect, the stock 
price tells firms how much the stock market values each unit 
of capital already in place. The firm then has a simple prob-
lem: Compare the purchase price of an additional unit of 
capital to the price the stock market is willing to pay for it. If 
the stock market value exceeds the purchase price, the firm 
should buy the machine; otherwise, it should not.
Tobin then constructed a variable corresponding to the 
value of a unit of capital in place relative to its purchase price 
and looked at how closely it moved with investment. He used 
the symbol q to denote the variable, and the variable has 
become known as Tobin’s q. Its construction is as follows:
1. Take the total value of US corporations as assessed by 
financial markets. That is, compute the sum of their 
stock market value (the price of a share times the num-
ber of shares). Compute also the total value of their 
bonds outstanding (remember that firms finance them-
selves not only through stocks but also through bonds). 
Add together the value of stocks and bonds. Subtract 
the firms’ financial assets, the value of the cash, bank 
accounts, and any bonds the firms might hold.
2. Divide this total value by the value of the capital stock 
of US corporations at replacement cost (the price firms 
would have to pay to replace their machines, their 
plants, and so on).
The ratio gives us, in effect, the value of a unit of capi-
tal in place relative to its current purchase price. This ratio 
is Tobin’s q. Intuitively, the higher q, the higher the value of 
capital relative to its current purchase price, and the higher 
investment should be. (In the example at the start of the box, 
Tobin’s q is equal to 2, so the firm should definitely invest.)
How tight is the relation between Tobin’s q and invest-
ment? The answer is given in Figure 1, which plots two vari-
ables for each year since 1960 for the United States.
Measured on the left vertical axis is the change in the 
ratio of  investment to capital for nonfinancial US corpo-
rations. Measured on the right vertical axis is the change 
of  Tobin’s q. This variable is lagged once. For 2000, for 
example, the figure shows the change in the ratio of  invest-
ment to capital for 2000, and the change in Tobin’s q for 
1999—that is, a year earlier. The reason for presenting 
the two variables this way is that the strongest relation in 
the data appears to be between investment this year and 
FOCUS


=== PAGE 124 ===
324 
Expectations 
Extensions
Tobin’s q last year. Put another way, movements in invest-
ment this year are more closely associated with movements 
in the stock market last year rather than with movements 
in the stock market this year; a plausible explanation is 
that it takes time for firms to make investment decisions, 
build new factories, and so on.
The figure shows that there is a clear relation between 
Tobin’s q and investment. This is not because firms blindly 
follow the signals from the stock market, but because invest-
ment decisions and stock market prices depend very much on 
the same factors—expected future profits and expected future 
interest rates.
The present value of expected profits is simply the ratio of the profit rate—that is, 
profit per unit of capital—to the sum of the real interest rate and the depreciation rate. 
Replacing (15.5) in equation (15.4), investment is given by:
 
It = Ia
Πt
rt + db 
(15.6)
Investment is a function of the ratio of the profit rate to the sum of the interest rate 
and the depreciation rate.
The sum of the real interest rate and the depreciation rate is called the user cost or 
the rental cost of capital. To see why, suppose the firm, instead of buying the machine, 
rented it from a rental agency. How much would the rental agency have to charge per 
year? Even if the machine did not depreciate, the agency would have to ask for an interest 
charge equal to rt times the price of the machine (we have assumed the price of a machine 
to be 1 in real terms, so rt times 1 is just rt). The agency has to get at least as much from 
buying and renting out the machine as it would from, say, buying bonds. In addition, the 
rental agency would have to charge for depreciation, d, times the price of the machine, 1. 
Therefore:
Rental cost = 1rt + d2
Even though firms typically do not rent the machines they use, 1rt + d2 still cap-
tures the firms’ implicit cost—sometimes called the shadow cost—of using the machine 
for one year.
The investment function given by equation (15.6) then has a simple interpretation. 
Investment depends on the ratio of profit to the user cost. The higher the profit, the higher the 
level of investment. The higher the user cost, the lower the level of investment.
This relation between profit, the real interest rate, and investment hinges on a 
strong assumption: that the future is expected to be the same as the present. It is a useful 
relation to remember—and one that macroeconomists keep handy in their toolbox. It is 
time, however, to relax this assumption and return to the role of expectations in deter-
mining investment decisions.
Current versus Expected Profit
The theory we have developed implies that investment should be forward looking 
and should depend primarily on expected future profits. (Under our assumption that it 
takes a year for investment to generate profits, current profit does not even appear in 
equation (15.3).)
One striking empirical fact about investment, however, is how strongly it moves with 
fluctuations in current profit. This relation is shown in Figure 15-3, which plots yearly 
changes in investment and profit since 1960 for the US economy. Profit is constructed as 
the ratio of the sum of after-tax profits plus interest payments paid by US nonfinancial corpo-
rations, divided by their capital stock. Investment is constructed as the ratio of investment 
by US nonfinancial corporations to their capital stock. Profit is lagged once. For 2000, for 
example, the figure shows the change in investment for 2000, and the change in profit 
c
Such arrangements exist. For 
example, many firms lease 
cars and trucks from leasing 
companies.


=== PAGE 125 ===
 
Chapter 15 
Expectations, Consumption, and Investment  
325
for 1999—that is, a year earlier. The reason for presenting the two variables this way is 
that the strongest relation in the data appears to be between investment in a given year 
and profit the year before—a lag plausibly due to the fact that it takes time for firms to 
decide on new investment projects in response to higher profit. The shaded areas in the 
figure represent years in which there was a recession—a decline in output for at least two 
consecutive quarters of the year.
There is a clear positive relation between changes in investment and changes 
in current profit in Figure 15-3. Is this relation inconsistent with the theory we 
have just developed, which holds that investment should be related to the pres-
ent value of expected future profits rather than to current profit? Not necessarily. 
If firms expect future profits to move very much like current profit, then the pres-
ent value of those future profits will move very much like current profit, and so will 
investment.
Economists who have looked at the question more closely have concluded, how-
ever, that the effect of current profit on investment is stronger than would be pre-
dicted by the theory developed so far. How they have gathered some of the evidence 
is described in the Focus Box “Profitability versus Cash Flow.” On the one hand, some 
firms with highly profitable investment projects but low current profits appear to 
be investing too little. On the other hand, some firms that have high current profit 
appear sometimes to invest in projects of doubtful profitability. In short, current profit 
appears to affect investment, even after controlling for the expected present value of 
profits.
Why does current profit play a role in the investment decision? The answer parallels 
our discussion of consumption in Section 15-1, where we discussed why consumption 
depends directly on current income. Some of the reasons we used to explain the behavior 
of consumers also apply to firms:
 
■
If its current profit is low, a firm that wants to buy new machines can get the 
funds it needs only by borrowing. But it may be reluctant to borrow. Although 
expected profits might look good, things may turn bad, leaving the firm unable 
to repay the debt. If current profit is high, however, the firm might be able to 
finance its investment just by retaining some of its earnings and without hav-
ing to borrow. The bottom line is that higher current profit may lead the firm to 
invest more.
22.0
21.5
21.0
20.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
20.020
20.015
20.010
20.005
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
Change in investment
(scale at left)
Change in profit
(scale at right)
Change in the ratio of investment
to capital
Change in the ratio of profit to capital
(percentage points)
Figure 15-3
Changes in Investment 
and Profit in the United 
States since 1960
Investment and profit move 
very much together.
Source: Gross investment: Federal 
Reserve Board, Flow of Funds, 
series FA105013005.A. Capital 
stock: BEA Fixed Assets Tables, 
net stock of private nonresiden-
tial fixed assets, nonfinancial. 
Profit: BEA, NIPA Table 1.14, Net 
operating surplus minus taxes, 
minus transfers, minus net interest 
payments.


=== PAGE 126 ===
326 
Expectations 
Extensions
Profitability versus Cash Flow
How much does investment depend on the expected pres-
ent value of future profits, and how much does it depend on 
current profit? In other words: Which is more important for 
investment decisions: Profitability (the expected present 
discounted value of future profits) or cash flow (current 
profit, the net flow of cash the firm is receiving now)?
The difficulty in answering this question is that, most of 
the time, cash flow and profitability move together. Firms that 
do well typically have both large cash flows and good future 
prospects. Firms that suffer losses often have poor future 
prospects.
The best way to isolate the effects of  cash flow and prof-
itability on investment is to identify times or events when 
cash flow and profitability move in different directions, 
and then look at what happens to investment. This is the 
approach taken by Owen Lamont, an economist at Harvard 
University. An example will help you understand Lamont’s 
strategy.
Think of two firms, A and B. Both are involved in steel 
production. Firm B is also involved in oil exploration.
Suppose there is a sharp drop in the price of oil, leading 
to losses in oil exploration. This shock decreases firm B’s cash 
flow. If the losses in oil exploration are large enough to offset 
the profits from steel production, firm B might even show an 
overall loss.
As a result of  the drop in the price of  oil, will firm B 
invest less in its steel operation than firm A does? If  only 
the profitability of  steel production matters, there is no 
reason for firm B to invest less in its steel operation than 
firm A. But if  current cash flow also matters, the fact that 
firm B has a lower cash flow may prevent it from invest-
ing as much as firm A in its steel operation. Looking at 
investment in the steel operations of  the two firms can 
tell us how much investment depends on cash flow versus 
profitability.
This is the empirical strategy followed by Lamont. He 
focused on what happened in 1986 when the price of oil in 
the United States dropped by 50%, leading to large losses in 
oil-related activities. He then looked at whether firms that 
had substantial oil activities cut investment in their nonoil 
activities relatively more than other firms in the same nonoil 
activities. He concluded that they did. He found that for 
every $1 decrease in cash flow as a result of the decrease 
in the price of oil, investment spending in nonoil activities 
was reduced by 10 to 20 cents. In short: Current cash flow 
matters.2
FOCUS
 
■
A firm that wants to invest might have difficulty borrowing. Potential lenders may 
not be convinced the project is as good as the firm says it is, and they may worry the 
firm will be unable to repay. If the firm has large current profits, it does not have to 
borrow and so does not need to convince potential lenders. It can proceed and invest 
as it pleases and is more likely to do so.
In summary, to fit the investment behavior we observe in practice, the investment 
equation is better specified as
It = I 3V1Πe
t2, Πt4
 
  1 +  , + 2 
(15.7)
In words: Investment depends both on the expected present value of future profits and on 
the current level of profit.
Profit and Sales
Let’s take stock of where we are. We have argued that investment depends both on 
current profit and on expected profit or, more specifically, on current and expected 
profit per unit of capital. We need to take one last step. What determines profit per 
unit of capital? Primarily two factors: (1) the level of sales and (2) the existing capital 
stock. If sales are low relative to the capital stock, profits per unit of capital are likely 
to be low as well.
2Source: Owen Lamont, “Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital Markets,” Journal of Finance, 1997, 
52(1): pp. 83–109.


=== PAGE 127 ===
 
Chapter 15 
Expectations, Consumption, and Investment  
327
Let’s write this more formally. Ignore the distinction between sales and output, and 
let Yt denote output (equivalently, sales). Let Kt denote the capital stock at time t. Our 
discussion suggests the following relation:
Πt = Π a Yt
Kt
b
 
  1 + 2 
(15.8)
Profit per unit of capital is an increasing function of the ratio of sales to the capi-
tal stock. For a given capital stock, the higher the sales, the higher the profit per unit 
of capital. For given sales, the higher the capital stock, the lower the profit per unit of 
capital.
How well does this relation hold in practice? Figure 15-4 plots yearly changes in 
profit per unit of capital (measured on the right vertical axis) and changes in the ratio 
of output to capital (measured on the left vertical axis) for the United States since 1960. 
As in Figure 15-3, profit per unit of capital is defined as the sum of after-tax profits plus 
interest payments by US nonfinancial corporations, divided by their capital stock mea-
sured at replacement cost. The ratio of output to capital is constructed as the ratio of 
GDP to the aggregate capital stock.
Figure 15-4 shows that there is a strong relation between changes in profit per 
unit of capital and changes in the ratio of output to capital. Given that most of the 
year-to-year changes in the ratio of output to capital come from movements in out-
put, and most of the year-to-year changes in profit per unit of capital come from 
movements in profit (capital moves slowly over time; the reason is that capital is 
large compared to yearly investment, so even large movements in investment lead 
to small changes in the capital stock), we can state the relation as follows: Profit 
decreases in recessions (shaded areas are periods of recession) and increases in 
expansions.
Why is this relation between output and profit relevant here? Because it implies a 
link between current output and expected future output, on the one hand, and investment, on 
the other. Current output affects current profit, expected future output affects expected 
future profit, and current and expected future profits affect investment. For example, 
anticipation of a sustained economic expansion leads firms to expect high profits, now 
Figure 15-4
Changes in Profit per Unit 
of Capital versus Changes 
in the Ratio of Output 
to Capital in the United 
States since 1960
Profit per unit of capital and 
the ratio of output to capital 
move largely together.
Source: Capital stock: BEA Fixed 
Assets Tables. Net stock of private 
nonresidential fixed assets, nonfi-
nancial assets; Profit: BEA, NIPA 
Table 1.14, net operating surplus 
minus taxes minus transfers minus 
net interest and miscellaneous pay-
ments; Output: BEA, Gross value 
added of nonfinancial corporate 
business sector.
22.0
21.5
21.0
20.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
210
28
26
24
22
0
2
4
6
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
Change in output
(scale at left)
Change in profit
(scale at right)
Change in the ratio of output to capital
(percentage points)  
Change in the ratio of profit to capital
(percentage points)


=== PAGE 128 ===
328 
Expectations 
Extensions
and for some time in the future. These expectations in turn lead to higher investment. 
The effect of current and expected output on investment, together with the effect of 
investment on demand and output, will play a crucial role when we return to the deter-
mination of output in Chapter 16.
15-3 THE VOLATILITY OF CONSUMPTION 
AND INVESTMENT
You will surely have noticed the similarities between our treatment of consumption and 
of investment behavior in Sections 15-1 and 15-2:
 
■
Whether consumers perceive current movements in income to be transitory 
or permanent affects their consumption decisions. The more transitory they 
expect a current increase in income to be, the less they will increase their 
consumption.
 
■
In the same way, whether firms perceive current movements in sales to be tran-
sitory or permanent affects their investment decisions. The more transitory 
they expect a current increase in sales to be, the less they revise their assess-
ment of  the present value of  profits, and thus the less likely they are to buy new 
machines or build new factories. This is why, for example, the boom in sales 
that happens every year between Thanksgiving and Christmas does not lead 
to a boom in investment every December. Firms understand that this boom is 
transitory.
But there are also important differences between consumption decisions and invest-
ment decisions:
 
■
The theory of consumption developed previously implies that when consumers 
perceive an increase in income as permanent, they respond with, at most, an equal 
increase in consumption. The permanent nature of the increase in income implies 
that they can afford to increase consumption now and in the future by the same 
amount as the increase in income. Increasing consumption more than one-for-one 
would require cuts in consumption later, and there is no reason for consumers to 
want to plan consumption this way.
 
■
Now consider the behavior of firms faced with an increase in sales they believe to be 
permanent. The present value of expected profits increases, leading to an increase 
in investment. In contrast to consumption, however, this does not imply that the 
increase in investment should be at most equal to the increase in sales. Rather, once 
a firm has decided that an increase in sales justifies the purchase of a new machine 
or the building of a new factory, it may want to proceed quickly, leading to a large but 
short-lived increase in investment spending. This increase in investment spending 
may exceed the increase in sales.
More concretely, take a firm that has a ratio of capital to its annual sales of, say, 3. 
An increase in sales of $10 million this year, if expected to be permanent, requires the 
firm to spend $30 million on additional capital if it wants to maintain the same ratio 
of capital to output. If the firm buys the additional capital right away, the increase in 
investment spending this year will equal three times the increase in sales. Once the capital 
stock has adjusted, the firm will return to its normal pattern of investment. This example 
is extreme because firms do not adjust their capital stock right away. But even if they 
High expected output 1
High expected profit 1
High investment today.
b
In the United States, retail 
sales are 24% higher on 
average in December than in 
other months. In France and 
Italy, sales are 60% higher in 
December.
c


=== PAGE 129 ===
 
Chapter 15 
Expectations, Consumption, and Investment  
329
adjust their capital stock over a few years, the increase in investment might still exceed 
the increase in sales for a while.
We can tell the same story in terms of  equation (15.8). Because we make no 
distinction here between output and sales, the initial increase in sales leads to an 
equal increase in output, Y, so that Y>K—the ratio of  the firm’s output to its exist-
ing capital stock—also increases. The result is higher profit, which leads the firm 
to undertake more investment. Over time, the higher level of  investment leads to 
a higher capital stock, K, so that Y>K decreases back to normal. Profit per unit of 
capital returns to normal and so does investment. Thus, in response to a permanent 
increase in sales, investment may increase a lot initially and then return to normal 
over time.
These differences suggest that investment should be more volatile than consump-
tion. How much more? The answer is given in Figure 15-5, which plots yearly rates of 
change in US consumption and investment since 1960. The shaded areas are years dur-
ing which the US economy was in recession. To make the figure easier to interpret, both 
rates of change are plotted as deviations from the average rate of change over the period, 
so that they are, on average, equal to zero.
Figure 15-5 yields three conclusions:
 
■
Consumption and investment usually move together. Recessions, for example, 
are typically associated with decreases in both investment and consumption. 
Given our discussion, which has emphasized that consumption and invest- 
ment depend largely on the same determinants, this should not come as a 
surprise.
 
■
Investment is much more volatile than consumption. Relative movements in invest-
ment range from -29% to +24%, whereas relative movements in consumption 
range only from -5% to +3%.
 
■
Because, however, the level of  investment is much smaller than the level of  con-
sumption (recall that investment accounts for about 15% of  GDP, whereas con-
sumption accounts for close to 70%), changes in investment from one year to 
the next end up being of  the same overall magnitude as changes in consump-
tion. In other words, both components contribute roughly equally to fluctua-
tions in output over time.
230
220
210
0
10
20
30
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
Deviation of percent growth in
investment from its mean
Deviation of percent growth of
consumption from its mean
Percentage points
Figure 15-5
Rates of Change in 
Consumption and 
Investment in the United 
States since 1960
Relative 
movements 
in 
investment are much larger 
than relative movements in 
consumption.
Source: FRED, series PCECC96, 
GPDI


=== PAGE 130 ===
330 
Expectations 
Extensions
SUMMARY
 
■Consumption depends on both wealth and current income. 
Wealth is the sum of nonhuman wealth (financial wealth 
and housing wealth) and human wealth (the present value 
of expected after-tax labor income).
 
■The response of consumption to changes in income depends 
on whether consumers perceive these changes as transitory 
or permanent.
 
■Consumption is likely to respond less than one-for-one to 
movements in income. Consumption might move even if 
current income does not change.
 
■Investment depends on both current profit and the present 
value of expected future profits.
 
■Under the simplifying assumption that firms expect prof-
its and interest rates to be the same in the future as they 
are today, we can think of investment as depending on the 
ratio of profit to the user cost of capital, where the user 
cost is the sum of the real interest rate and the deprecia-
tion rate.
 
■Movements in profit are closely related to movements in 
output. Hence, we can think of investment as depending 
indirectly on current and expected future output move-
ments. Firms that anticipate a long output expansion, and 
thus a long sequence of high profits, will invest. Movements 
in output that are not expected to last will have a small effect 
on investment.
 
■Investment is much more volatile than consumption. But 
because investment accounts only for 15% of GDP and con-
sumption accounts for 70%, movements in investment and 
consumption are of roughly equal importance in account-
ing for movements in aggregate output.
KEY TERMS
permanent income theory of consumption, 314
life-cycle theory of consumption, 314
financial wealth, 314
housing wealth, 314
human wealth, 314
nonhuman wealth, 314
total wealth, 314
panel datasets, 315
static expectations, 322
Tobin’s q, 323
user cost, 324
rental cost, 324
profitability, 326
cash flow, 326
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using the information in this chapter, label each of the following 
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. For a typical college student, human wealth and nonhu-
man wealth are approximately equal.
b. Natural experiments, such as retirement, do not suggest 
that expectations of future income are a major factor 
affecting consumption.
c. At the start of the financial crisis, expected future income 
growth fell.
d. Buildings and factories depreciate much faster than 
machines.
e. A high value for Tobin’s q indicates that the stock market 
believes that capital is overvalued, and thus investment 
should be lower.
f. Unless current profit affects expectations of future profit, it 
should have no impact on investment.
g. Data from the past three decades in the United States sug-
gest that corporate profits are closely tied to the business 
cycle.
h. Changes in consumption and investment typically 
occur in the same direction and are roughly of the same 
magnitude.
2. A consumer has nonhuman wealth equal to $100,000. She 
earns $40,000 this year and expects her salary to increase by 5% 
in real terms each year for the following two years. She will then 
retire. The real interest rate is equal to 0% and is expected to remain 
at 0% in the future. Labor income is taxed at a rate of 25%.
a. What is this consumer’s human wealth?
b. What is her total wealth?
c. If she expects to live for seven more years after retiring and 
wants her consumption to remain the same (in real terms) 
every year from now on, how much can she consume this 
year?
d. If she received a bonus of $20,000 in the current year only, 
with all future salary payments remaining as stated earlier, 
by how much could this consumer increase consumption 
now and in the future?
e. Suppose now that at retirement, Social Security will start 
paying benefits each year equal to 60% of this consum-
er’s earnings during her last working year. Assume that 
benefits are not taxed. How much can she consume this 
year and still maintain constant consumption over her 
lifetime?
3. A pretzel manufacturer is considering buying another pretzel-
making machine that costs $100,000. The machine will depreciate 


=== PAGE 131 ===
 
Chapter 15 
Expectations, Consumption, and Investment  
331
by 8% per year. It will generate real profits equal to $18,000 next 
year, $18,000 (1 – 8%) two years from now (that is, the same 
real profits but adjusted for depreciation), $18,000 (1 – 8%)2 
three years from now, and so on. Determine whether the manufac-
turer should buy the machine if the real interest rate is assumed to 
remain constant at each of the values in parts a through c.
a. 5%
b. 10%
c. 15%
4. Suppose that at age 22, you have just finished college and have 
been offered a job with a starting salary of $40,000. Your salary 
will remain constant in real terms. However, you have also been 
admitted to a professional school. The school can be completed in 
two years. Upon graduation, you expect your starting salary to 
be 10% higher in real terms and to remain constant in real terms 
thereafter. The tax rate on labor income is 40%.
a. If the real interest rate is zero and you expect to retire at 
age 60 (i.e., if you do not go to professional school, you 
expect to work for 38 years total), what is the maximum 
you should be willing to pay in tuition to attend this profes-
sional school?
b. What is your answer to part a if you expect to pay 30% in 
taxes?
DIG DEEPER
5. Individual saving and aggregate capital accumulation
Suppose that every consumer is born with zero financial 
wealth and lives for three periods: youth, middle age, and old age. 
Consumers work in the first two periods and retire in the last one. 
Their income is $5 in the first period, $25 in the second, and $0 in 
the last one. Inflation and expected inflation are equal to zero, and so 
is the real interest rate.
a. What is the present discounted value of labor income at 
the beginning of the first period of life? What is the highest 
sustainable level of consumption such that consumption is 
equal in all three periods?
b. For each age group, what is the amount of saving that 
allows consumers to maintain the constant level of con-
sumption you found in part a? (Hint: Saving can be a nega-
tive number if the consumer needs to borrow to maintain a 
certain level of consumption.)
c. Suppose there are n people born each period. What is total 
saving in the economy? (Hint: Add up the saving of each 
age group. Remember that some age groups may have neg-
ative saving.) Explain.
d. What is total financial wealth in the economy? 
(Hint: Compute the financial wealth of people at the begin-
ning of the first period of life, the beginning of the second 
period, and the beginning of the third period. Add the three 
numbers. Remember that people can be in debt, so finan-
cial wealth can be negative.)
6. Borrowing constraints and aggregate capital accumulation
Continue with the setup from Problem 5, but suppose now that 
borrowing restrictions do not allow young consumers to borrow. 
If we call the sum of income and total financial wealth “cash on 
hand,” then the borrowing restriction means that consumers cannot 
consume more than their cash on hand. In each age group, consum-
ers compute their total wealth and then determine their desired level 
of consumption as the highest level that allows their consumption 
to be equal in all three periods. However, if at any time, desired con-
sumption exceeds cash on hand, then consumers are constrained to 
consume exactly their cash on hand.
a. Calculate consumption in each period of life. Compare this 
answer to your answer to part a of Problem 5 and explain 
any differences.
b. Calculate total saving for the economy. Compare this 
answer to your answer to part c of Problem 5 and explain 
any differences.
c. Derive total financial wealth for the economy. Compare this 
answer to your answer to part d of Problem 5 and explain 
any differences.
d. Consider the following statement: “Financial liberalization 
may be good for individual consumers, but it is bad for over-
all capital accumulation.” Discuss.
7. Saving with uncertain future income
Consider a consumer who lives for three periods: youth, 
middle age, and old age. When young, the consumer earns 
$20,000 in labor income. Earnings during middle age are 
uncertain; there is a 50% chance that the consumer will earn 
$40,000 and a 50% chance that the consumer will earn 
$100,000. When old, the consumer spends savings accu-
mulated during the previous periods. Assume that inflation, 
expected inflation, and the real interest rate equal zero. Ignore 
taxes for this problem.
a. What is the expected value of earnings in the middle period 
of life? Given this number, what is the present discounted 
value of expected lifetime labor earnings? If the consumer 
wishes to maintain constant expected consumption over 
her lifetime, how much will she consume in each period? 
How much will she save in each period?
b. Now suppose the consumer wishes, above all else, to 
maintain a minimum consumption level of $20,000 
in each period of her life. To do so, she must consider 
the worst outcome. If earnings during middle age turn 
out to be $40,000, how much should the consumer 
spend when she is young to guarantee consumption of 
at least $20,000 in each period? How does this level of 
consumption compare to the level you obtained for the 
young period in part a?
c. Given your answer in part b, suppose that the con-
sumer’s earnings during middle age turn out to be 
$100,000. How much will she spend in each period of 
life? Will consumption be constant over the consumer’s 
lifetime? (Hint: When the consumer reaches middle age, 
she will try to maintain constant consumption for the 
last two periods of  life, as long as she can consume at 
least $20,000 in each period.)
d. What effect does uncertainty about future labor income 
have on saving (or borrowing) by young consumers?


=== PAGE 132 ===
332 
Expectations 
Extensions
EXPLORE FURTHER
8. The movements of consumption and investment
Go to the FRED database operated by the Federal Reserve Bank 
of St. Louis. Find annual data for personal consumption expenditures 
and gross private domestic investment as well as for real GDP. The data 
are measured in real dollars. Place values starting in 1960 and ending 
with the most recent year of data in a spreadsheet. (FRED allows you to 
directly download to a spreadsheet.) As of the time of writing the series 
names are: Real GDP (Chained 2012 dollars), GDPCA; Real Personal 
Consumption Expenditures (Chained 2012 dollars), PCECCA; Real 
Gross Private Domestic Investment (Chained 2012 dollars), GPDICA. 
You should be able to search these names but be careful to download the 
levels of these variables at an annual rate. Pay attention to whether the 
variables are measured in millions or billions of dollars.
a. On average, how much larger is consumption than invest-
ment? Calculate both as a percent of GDP.
b. Compute the change in the levels of consumption and 
investment from one year to the next, and graph them for 
the period 1961 to the latest available date. Are the year-
to-year changes in consumption and investment of similar 
magnitude?
c. Compute the annual percentage change in real consump-
tion and real investment from 1961. Which is more volatile?
9. Consumer confidence, disposable income, and recessions
Go to the Web site of the FRED economic data base and down-
load the quarterly series for real personal disposable income per capita 
(series name A229RX0Q048SBEA (billions of chained 2012 dol-
lars)), the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers Index of 
Consumer Sentiment (series UMCSENT)). The Consumer Sentiment 
data are monthly and you will need to create a quarterly average from 
the monthly observations by averaging. We will use this data series as 
our measure of consumer confidence. The monthly observations start 
in January 1978, so begin your study at that date.
a. Before you look at the data, can you think of any reason 
to expect consumer confidence to be related to disposable 
income? Can you think of reasons why consumer confi-
dence would be unrelated to disposable income?
b. Plot the level of the index of consumer sentiment against 
the growth rate of disposable income per person. Is the 
relationship positive?
c. Plot the change in the index of consumer sentiment 
against the growth rate of disposable income per person. 
What does that relation look like? Focus on observations 
where the change in disposable income is less than 0.2% in 
absolute value. Is the level of consumer sentiment chang-
ing? How would we interpret such observations?
d. Focus on the years 2007, 2008, and 2009. How does the 
behavior of consumer sentiment from 2007 to 2008 com-
pare to the usual behavior in consumer sentiment? Why? 
(Hint: The bankruptcy of Lehmann Brothers occurred in 
September 2008.) Does the fall in consumer sentiment 
anticipate the decline in real personal disposable income 
that accompanied the crisis?
e. Donald Trump was rather unexpectedly elected President 
in November 2017. Is there any evidence of a change in 
consumer confidence in the first quarter of 2017?
f. There was a large tax cut, signed into law on Decem-
ber 22, 2017 and implemented in 2018. Is there a 
 substantial change in personal disposable income per 
capita from 2017 to 2018? Is there a change in the 
index of  consumer sentiment between 2017 and 2018?


=== PAGE 133 ===
 
Chapter 15 
Expectations, Consumption, and Investment  
333
APPENDIX:  Derivation of the Expected Present Value of 
Profits under Static Expectations
You saw in the text (equation (15.3)) that the expected present 
value of profits is given by
V1Πe
t2 = 
1
1 + rt
Πe
t + 1 + 
1
11 + rt211 + re
t + 1211 - d2 Πe
t + 2 + g
If firms expect both future profits (per unit of capital) and 
future interest rates to remain at the same level as today, so that 
Πe
t + 1 = Πe
t + 2 = g = Πt and re
t + 1 = re
t + 2 = g = rt, the 
equation becomes
V1Πe
t2 =
1
1 + rt Πt +
1
11 + rt22 11 - d2 Πt + g
Factoring out 31>11 + rt24Πt,
 
V1Πe
t2 =
1
1 + rt Πt a1 + 1 - d
1 + rt
+ gb 
(15.A1)
The term in parentheses in this equation is a geometric 
series of the form 1 + x + x2 + g. So, from Proposition 2 in 
Appendix 2 at the end of the book,
11 + x + x2 + g2 =
1
1 - x
Here x equals 11 - d2>11 + rt2, so
a1 + 1 - d
1 + rt
+ a 1 - d
1 + rt
b
2
+ gb
=
1
1 - 11 - d2>11 + rt2 = 1 + rt
rt + d
Replacing the term in parentheses in equation (15.A1) 
with the expression above and manipulating gives:
V1Πe
t2 =
1
1 + rt
 1 + rt
rt + d Πt
Simplifying gives equation (15.5) in the text:
V1Πe
t2 =
Πt
1rt + d2


=== PAGE 134 ===
This page is intentionally left blank


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 134 ===
This page is intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 135 ===
335
Expectations, 
Output, and Policy
I
n Chapter 14, we saw how expectations affected asset prices, from bonds to stocks to 
houses. In Chapter 15, we saw how expectations affected consumption decisions and 
investment decisions. In this chapter we put the pieces together and take another look 
at the effects of monetary and fiscal policy.
Section 16-1 draws the major implication of what we have learned, namely that expecta-
tions of both future output and future interest rates affect current spending, and therefore 
current output.
Section 16-2 looks at monetary policy. It shows that the effects of monetary policy 
depend crucially on how changes in the policy rate today lead people and firms to change 
their expectations of future interest rates and future income and, by implication, to change 
their spending decisions.
Section 16-3 turns to fiscal policy. It shows how, in contrast to the simple model you saw 
in the core, a fiscal contraction can sometimes lead to an increase in output, even in the 
short run. Again, how expectations respond to policy is at the center of the story.
16
If you remember one basic message from this chapter, it should be: The effects 
of monetary and fiscal policy depend very much on how they affect expectations. 


=== PAGE 136 ===
336 
Expectations 
Extensions
16-1 EXPECTATIONS AND DECISIONS: 
TAKING STOCK
Let’s start by reviewing what we have learned, and then discuss how we should modify 
the characterization of goods and financial markets—the IS-LM model—developed in 
the core.
Expectations, Consumption, and Investment Decisions
The theme of Chapter 15 was that both consumption and investment decisions depend 
very much on expectations of future income and interest rates. The channels through 
which expectations affect consumption and investment spending are summarized in 
Figure 16-1.
Note the many channels through which expected future variables affect current 
decisions, both directly and through asset prices:
 
■
An increase in current and expected future after-tax real labor income or a decrease 
in current and expected future real interest rates increase human wealth (the 
expected present discounted value of after-tax real labor income), which in turn 
leads to an increase in consumption.
 
■
An increase in current and expected future real dividends or a decrease in current 
and expected future real interest rates increases stock prices, which leads to an 
increase in nonhuman wealth and, in turn, an increase in consumption.
 
■
A decrease in current and expected future nominal interest rates leads to an increase 
in bond prices, which leads to an increase in nonhuman wealth and, in turn, an 
increase in consumption.
 
■
An increase in current and expected future real after-tax profits or a decrease in cur-
rent and expected future real interest rates increases the present value of real after-
tax profits, which leads, in turn, to an increase in investment.
Expectations and the IS Relation
A model that gave a detailed treatment of consumption and investment along the lines 
suggested in Figure 16-1 would be complicated. It can be done, and indeed it is done in 
the large models that macroeconomists build to understand the economy and analyze 
Note that in the case of 
bonds, it is nominal rather 
than real interest rates that 
matter because bonds are 
claims to future dollars rather 
than to future goods. c
Current and future after-tax labor income
Human wealth
Consumption
Investment
Nonhuman wealth
Current and future real interest rates
Current and future after-tax profits
Present value of
after-tax profits
Current and future real interest rates
Current and future real dividends
Stocks
Bonds
Current and future real interest rates
Current and future nominal interest rates
Figure 16-1
Expectations and Private 
Spending: The Channels
Expectations 
affect 
con-
sumption 
and 
investment 
decisions both directly and 
through asset prices.


=== PAGE 137 ===
 
Chapter 16 
Expectations, Output, and Policy 
337
policy; but this is not the place for such complications. We want to capture the essence of 
what you have learned so far, how consumption and investment depend on expectations 
of the future, without getting lost in the details.
To do so, let’s make a major simplification. Let’s reduce the present and the future 
to only two periods: (1) a current period, which you can think of as the current year, and 
(2) a future period, which you can think of as all future years lumped together. This way 
we do not have to keep track of expectations about each future year.
Having made this assumption, the question becomes: How should we write the IS 
relation for the current period? In Chapter 6 (equation (6.5)), we wrote the following 
equation for the IS relation:
Y = C 1Y - T2 + I1Y, r + x2 + G
We assumed that consumption depended only on current income, and that invest-
ment depended only on current output and the current borrowing rate, equal to the 
policy rate plus a risk premium. We now want to modify this to take into account how 
expectations affect both consumption and investment. We proceed in two steps:
First, we rewrite the equation in more compact form without changing its content. 
For that purpose, let’s define aggregate private spending as the sum of consumption and 
investment spending.
A1Y, T, r, x2 K C1Y - T2 + I1Y, r + x2
where A stands for aggregate private spending, or simply, private spending. With 
this notation we can rewrite the IS relation as
Y = A1Y, T, r, x2 + G
 
1+,-,-,-2 
(16.1)
The properties of aggregate private spending, A, follow from the properties of 
consumption and investment that we derived in previous chapters: Aggregate private 
spending is
 
■
An increasing function of income Y: Higher income (equivalently, output) increases 
both consumption and investment.
 
■
A decreasing function of taxes T: Higher taxes decrease consumption.
 
■
A decreasing function of the real policy rate r: A higher real policy rate decreases 
investment.
 
■
A decreasing function of the risk premium x: A higher risk premium increases the 
borrowing rate and decreases investment.
The first step only simplified notation. The second step is to modify equation (16.1) to 
take into account the role of expectations. Because the focus in this chapter is on expec-
tations rather than on the risk premium, I shall assume that it is constant, and so to save 
on notation, I shall ignore it in the model. With the focus on expectations, the natural 
extension of equation (16.1) is to allow spending to depend not only on current variables 
but also on their expected values in the future.
Y = A1Y, T, r, Y′e, T′e, r′e2 + G
 
1+,-,-,+,  -,  -2 
(16.2)
Primes denote future values and the superscript e denotes an expectation, so Y′e, T′e, 
and r′e denote future expected income, future expected taxes, and the future expected 
real interest rate, respectively. The notation is a bit heavy, but what it captures is 
straightforward.
This way of dividing time 
between “today” and “later” 
is the way many of us orga-
nize our own lives. Think of 
“things to do today” versus 
“things that can wait.” You 
can also think of the future 
period as the combination 
of the “medium run” and 
the “long run” we saw in the 
core.
b
The reason for doing so is 
to group together the two 
components of demand, C 
and I, which both depend on 
expectations.
b
Introducing uncertainty and 
risk formally in the model 
would make it too heavy. I 
give an informal discussion in 
a Focus Box at the end of the 
chapter called “Uncertainty 
and Fluctuations.”
b
Notation: Primes stand for 
values of the variables in the 
future period. The superscript 
e stands for expected.
b


=== PAGE 138 ===
338 
Expectations 
Extensions
 
■
Increases in either current or expected future income increase private 
spending.
 
■
Increases in either current or expected future taxes decrease private spending.
 
■
Increases in either the current or expected future real policy rate decrease private 
spending.
With the goods market equilibrium now given by equation (16.2), Figure 16-2 shows 
the new IS curve for the current period. As usual, to draw the curve we take all variables 
other than current output, Y, and the current real policy rate, r, as given. Thus, the IS curve 
is drawn for given values of current and future expected taxes, T and T′e, for given values of 
expected future output, Y′e, and for given values of the expected future real policy rate, r′e.
The new IS curve, based on equation (16.2), is still downward sloping, for the same 
reason it was in Chapter 6: A decrease in the current policy rate leads to an increase 
in private spending. This increase in private spending leads, through a multiplier effect, 
to an increase in output. We can say more, however. The new IS curve is much steeper 
than the IS curve we drew in Chapter 6. Put another way, everything else the same, a large 
decrease in the current policy rate is likely to have only a small effect on equilibrium 
output.
To see why the effect is small, take point A on the IS curve in Figure 16-2 and consider 
the effects of a decrease in the real policy rate, from rA to rB. The effect of this decrease on 
output depends on the strength of the effects of the real policy rate on (1) spending given 
income and (2) the size of the multiplier.
Let’s examine each one:
 
■
A decrease in the current real policy rate, given unchanged expectations of the future 
real policy rate, does not have much effect on private spending. We saw why in 
Chapters 14 and 15: A change in only the current real interest rate does not lead 
to large changes in present values and therefore does not lead to large changes in 
spending. For example, firms are not likely to change their investment plans very 
much in response to a decrease in the current real interest rate if they do not expect 
future real interest rates to be lower as well.
If Y or Y′e increases 1 A 
increases.
c
If r or r′e increases 1 A 
decreases.
c
If T or T′e increases 1 A 
decreases.
c
Suppose you have a 30-year 
loan and the 1-year interest 
rate goes down from 5% to 
2%. All future 1-year rates 
remain the same. By how 
much will the 30-year interest 
rate come down? (Answer: 
from 5% to 4.9%. To see 
why, extend equation (14.11) 
to the 30-year yield, which is 
the average of 30 one-year 
rates.) c
DG   > 0, or
D
e > 0, or
D
e < 0, or
D
e < 0
DT    > 0, or
DT
e > 0, or
Dr
e  > 0
IS
A
B
Current output, Y
Current interest rate, r
YB
YA
rA
rB
T
r
Y
Figure 16-2
The New IS Curve
Given 
expectations, 
a 
de-crease in the real policy 
rate leads to a small increase 
in output. The IS curve is 
steeply downward sloping. 
Increases 
in 
government 
spending or in expected 
future output shift the IS 
curve to the right. Increases 
in taxes, in expected future 
taxes, or in the expected 
future real policy rate shift 
the IS curve to the left.


=== PAGE 139 ===
 
Chapter 16 
Expectations, Output, and Policy 
339
 
■
The multiplier is likely to be small. Recall that the size of the multiplier depends on 
the size of the effect that a change in current income (output) has on spending. But a 
change in current income, given unchanged expectations of future income, is unlikely to 
have a large effect on spending. The reason: Changes in income that are not expected 
to last have only a limited effect on either consumption or investment. Consumers 
who expect their income to be higher for only a year will increase consumption, but 
by much less than the increase in their income. Firms that expect sales to be higher 
for only a year are unlikely to change their investment plans much, if at all.
Putting things together, a large decrease in the current real policy rate—from rA to rB 
in Figure 16-2—leads to only a small increase in output, from YA to YB. Put another way: 
The IS curve, which goes through points A and B, is steeply downward sloping.
Let’s look at the effects of the other variables in equation (16.2). A change in any 
variable in equation (16.2) other than Y and r shifts the IS curve:
 
■
Changes in current taxes (T) or current government spending (G) shift the IS curve
An increase in current government spending increases spending at a given 
interest rate, shifting the IS curve to the right; an increase in taxes shifts the IS curve 
to the left. These shifts are represented in Figure 16-2.
 
■
Changes in expected future variables 1Y′e, T′e, r′e2 also shift the IS curve
An increase in expected future output, Y′e, shifts the IS curve to the right. 
Higher expected future income leads consumers to feel wealthier and spend more; 
higher expected future output implies higher expected profits, leading firms to invest 
more. Higher spending by consumers and firms leads, through the multiplier effect, 
to higher output. By a similar argument, an increase in expected future taxes leads 
consumers to decrease their current spending and shifts the IS curve to the left. And 
an increase in the expected future real policy rate decreases current spending, also 
leading to a decrease in output and shifting the IS curve to the left. These shifts are 
also represented in Figure 16-2.
We are now ready to look at the effects of monetary and fiscal policy. This is where 
the hard work of the two previous chapters will pay off.
16-2 MONETARY POLICY, EXPECTATIONS, 
AND OUTPUT
The interest rate that the Fed affects directly is the current real interest rate, r. So, the LM 
curve is still given by a horizontal line at the real policy rate chosen by the Fed, called r. 
The IS and LM relations are thus given by:
 
IS  :    Y = A1Y, T, r, Y′e, T′e, r′e2 + G 
(16.3)
 
LM  : r = r
 
(16.4)
The corresponding IS and LM curves are drawn in Figure 16-3. Equilibrium in goods 
and financial markets implies that the economy is at point A.
Monetary Policy Revisited
Now suppose the economy is in recession and the Fed decides to lower the real policy rate.
Assume first that this expansionary monetary policy does not change expectations of 
either the future real policy rate or future output. In Figure 16-4, the LM curve shifts down, 
from LM to LM–. (Because I have already used primes to denote future values of the variables, 
Suppose the firm where 
you work decides to give 
all employees a one-time 
bonus of $10,000. You do not 
expect it to happen again. By 
how much will you increase 
your consumption this year? 
(If you need to, look at the 
discussion of consumption 
behavior in Chapter 15.)
b


=== PAGE 140 ===
340 
Expectations 
Extensions
I have to use double primes to denote shifts in curves in this chapter.) The equilibrium moves 
from point A to point B, with higher output and a lower real interest rate. The steep IS curve, 
however, implies that the decrease in the current interest rate has only a small effect on out-
put. Changes in the current interest rate, if not accompanied by changes in expectations, 
have only a small effect on spending and in turn a small effect on output.
Is it reasonable, however, to assume that expectations are unaffected by an expan-
sionary monetary policy? Isn’t it likely that, as the Fed lowers the current real policy rate, 
financial markets now anticipate lower real interest rates in the future as well, along with 
higher future output stimulated by the lower future interest rates? What happens if they 
do anticipate these changes?
At a given current real policy rate, prospects of a lower future real policy rate and 
of higher future output both increase spending and output, shifting the IS curve to the 
right, from IS to IS0. The new equilibrium is given by point C. Thus, although the direct 
effect of the monetary expansion on output is limited, the full effect, once changes in 
expectations are taken into account, is much larger.
Current real interest rate, r
LM
Current Output, Y
IS
A
YA
r
Figure 16-3
The New IS-LM
The IS curve is steeply 
downward 
sloping. 
Other 
things being equal, a change 
in the current interest rate 
has a small effect on output. 
Given the current real inter-
est set by the central bank, r, 
the equilibrium is at point A.
Central bank lowers r
LM
IS
YA
YB
YC
r
A
B
C
Current real interest rate, r
Current Output, Y
D
e > 0
D
e < 0
Y
r
IS
LM
r
Figure 16-4
The Effects of an 
Expansionary Monetary 
Policy
The effects of monetary 
policy on output depend 
very much on whether and 
how monetary policy affects 
expectations.


=== PAGE 141 ===
 
Chapter 16 
Expectations, Output, and Policy 
341
You have just learned an important lesson. The effects of monetary policy—the 
effects of any type of macroeconomic policy, for that matter—depend crucially on its 
effect on expectations:
 
■
If a monetary expansion leads financial investors, firms, and consumers to revise 
their expectations of future interest rates and output, then the effects of the mon-
etary expansion on output may be large.
 
■
But if expectations remain unchanged, the effects of the monetary expansion on 
output will be limited.
We can link this to the discussion in Chapter 14 about the effects of changes in mon-
etary policy on the stock market. Many of the same issues were present there. If, when the 
change in monetary policy takes place, it comes as no surprise to investors, firms, and con-
sumers, then expectations will not change; the stock market will react only a little, if at all, 
This is why central banks 
think of their task as not only 
to adjust the policy rate but 
also to “manage expecta-
tions,” to lead to predictable 
effects of changes in the 
policy rate on the economy. 
Giving an indication to finan-
cial markets about future 
policy rates is known as 
“forward guidance” by the 
central bank. More on this in 
Chapters 21 and 23.
b
Rational Expectations
The importance of expectations is an old theme in macroeco-
nomics. But until the early 1970s, macroeconomists thought 
of expectations in one of two ways:
 
■
One was as animal spirits (from an expression Keynes 
introduced in the General Theory to refer to move-
ments in investment that could not be explained by 
movements in current variables). In other words, shifts 
in expectations were considered important but were left 
largely unexplained.
 
■
The other was as the result of  simple, backward-
looking rules. For example, people were assumed to 
have static expectations; that is, to expect the future 
to be like the present (we used this assumption when 
discussing the Phillips curve in Chapter 8 and when 
exploring investment decisions in Chapter 15). Or 
people were assumed to have adaptive expectations. 
If, for example, their forecast of  a given variable in 
a given period turned out to be too low, people were 
assumed to “adapt” by raising their expectation for 
the value of  the variable for the following period; so 
seeing an inflation rate higher than they had expected 
led people to revise upward their forecast of  inflation 
in the future.
In the early 1970s, a group of macroeconomists led by 
Robert Lucas (at the University of Chicago) and Thomas 
Sargent (at the University of Minnesota) argued that these 
assumptions do not do justice to the way people form expec-
tations. (Lucas received the Nobel Prize in 1995; Sargent 
received the Nobel Prize in 2011.) They argued that, in 
thinking about the effects of alternative policies, economists 
should assume that people have rational expectations—that 
they look into the future and do the best job they can in pre-
dicting it. This is not the same as assuming that people know 
the future, but rather that they use the information they 
have in the best possible way.
Using the popular macroeconomic models of the time, 
Lucas and Sargent showed that replacing traditional assump-
tions about expectation formation with the assumption of 
rational expectations could fundamentally alter the results. 
For example, Lucas challenged the notion that disinflation, 
achieved through tight monetary policy, necessarily led to 
an increase in unemployment for some time. Under rational 
expectations, he argued, a credible disinflation policy might 
be able to decrease inflation without any increase in unem-
ployment. More generally, the research of Lucas and Sargent 
showed the need for a rethinking of macroeconomic models 
under the assumption of rational expectations, and this is 
what happened over the next two decades.
Most macroeconomists today use rational expectations 
as a working assumption in their models and analyses of 
policy. It is not because they believe that people truly have 
rational expectations. Surely there are times when adaptive 
expectations may be a better description of reality; there 
are also times when people, firms, or financial market par-
ticipants lose sight of reality and become too optimistic or 
too pessimistic. (Recall our discussion of bubbles and fads 
in Chapter 14.) But, when thinking about the likely effects 
of a specific economic policy, the best assumption to make is 
that financial markets, people, and firms will do the best they 
can to work out the implications of that policy: Designing a 
policy on the assumption that people will make systematic 
mistakes in responding to it seems unwise.
At the same time, it is clear that the assumption of ratio-
nal expectations overstates the ability of people and firms to 
think about the future and that we have to go beyond this 
assumption. Indeed, much current research focuses on how 
to take into account some of the behavioral limits and biases 
that determine how people form expectations. A workable 
and reliable alternative does not yet exist, however, and 
for the moment, rational expectations remain the default 
assumption of most macroeconomic models.
FOCUS


=== PAGE 142 ===
342 
Expectations 
Extensions
and thus demand and output will change only a little, if at all. But if the change comes as 
a surprise and is expected to last, expectations of future output will go up, expectations of 
future interest rates will come down, the stock market will boom, and output will increase.
At this stage, you may have become skeptical that macroeconomists can say much 
about the effects of policy or the effects of other shocks. If the effects depend so much on 
what happens to expectations, can macroeconomists have any hope of predicting what 
will happen? The answer is yes.
Saying that the effect of a particular policy depends on its effect on expectations is not 
the same as saying that anything can happen. Expectations are not arbitrary. The manager 
of a mutual fund who must decide whether to invest in stocks or bonds, the firm thinking 
about whether to build a new plant, the consumer thinking about how much she should 
save for retirement, all give a lot of thought to what might happen in the future. We can 
think of each of them as forming expectations about the future by assessing the likely 
course of future expected policy and then working out the implications for future activity. 
If they do not do it themselves (surely most of us do not spend our time solving macro-
economic models before making decisions), they do so indirectly by watching TV, reading 
newspapers, or finding public information on the internet, all of which in turn rely on the 
forecasts of public and private forecasters. Economists refer to expectations formed in this 
forward-looking manner as rational expectations. The introduction of the assumption 
of rational expectations, starting in the 1970s, has largely shaped the way macroecono-
mists think about policy. It is discussed further in the Focus Box “Rational Expectations.”
We could go back and think about the implications of rational expectations in the 
case of the monetary expansion we have just studied. It will be more fun to do this in the 
context of a change in fiscal policy, and this is what we now turn to.
16-3 DEFICIT REDUCTION, EXPECTATIONS, 
AND OUTPUT
Recall the conclusions we reached in the core about the effects of a budget deficit 
reduction:
 
■
In the short run, a reduction in the budget deficit, unless it is offset by a monetary 
expansion, leads to lower private spending and to a contraction in output.
 
■
In the medium run, a lower budget deficit implies higher saving and higher 
investment.
 
■
In the long run, higher investment translates into higher capital and thus higher 
output.
It is the adverse short-run effect that—in addition to the unpopularity of increases 
in taxes or reductions in government programs—often deters governments from tackling 
their budget deficits. Why take the risk of a recession now for benefits that will accrue 
only in the future?
A number of economists have argued, however, that under some conditions a deficit 
reduction might actually increase output even in the short run. Their argument is that, 
if people take into account the future beneficial effects of deficit reduction, their expec-
tations about the future might improve enough to lead to an increase—rather than a 
decrease—in current spending, thereby increasing current output. This section explores 
their argument. The Focus Box “Can a Budget Deficit Reduction Lead to an Output 
Expansion? Ireland in the 1980s” reviews some of the supporting evidence.
Assume the economy is described by equation (16.3) for the IS relation and equa-
tion (16.4) for the LM relation. Now suppose the government announces a program to 
We discussed the 
short- and medium-run 
effects of changes in fiscal 
policy in Section 9–3. We 
discussed the long-run 
effects of changes in fiscal 
policy in Section 11–2.
c


=== PAGE 143 ===
 
Chapter 16 
Expectations, Output, and Policy 
343
reduce the deficit, through decreases in both current spending, G, and future spending, 
G′e. What will happen to output in the current period?
The Role of Expectations about the Future
Suppose first that expectations of future output 1Y′e2 and of the future interest rate 1r′e2 
do not change. Then we get the standard answer: The decrease in government spending 
in the current period leads to a shift of the IS curve to the left, and so to a decrease in 
output.
The crucial question therefore is what happens to expectations. To answer, let us go 
back to what we learned in the core about the effects of a deficit reduction in the medium 
run and the long run.
 
■
In the medium run, a deficit reduction has no effect on output. It leads, however, to a 
lower interest rate and to higher investment. These were two of the main lessons of 
Chapter 9.
Let’s review the logic behind each.
Recall that, when we look at the medium run, we ignore the effects of capital 
accumulation on output. So in the medium run, the natural level of output depends 
on the level of productivity (taken as given) and on the natural level of employment. 
The natural level of employment depends in turn on the natural rate of unemploy-
ment. If spending by the government on goods and services does not affect the nat-
ural rate of unemployment—and there is no obvious reason why it should—then 
changes in spending will not affect the natural level of output. Therefore, a deficit 
reduction has no effect on the level of output in the medium run.
Now recall that output must be equal to spending, which is the sum of public 
and private spending. Given that output is unchanged and that public spending is 
lower, private spending must therefore be higher. To achieve higher private spend-
ing requires a lower equilibrium interest rate: The lower interest rate leads to higher 
investment and thus to higher private spending, which offsets the decrease in public 
spending and output is unchanged.
 
■
In the long run—that is, taking into account the effects of capital accumulation on 
output—higher investment leads to a higher capital stock and therefore a higher 
level of output.
This was the main lesson of Chapter 11. The higher the proportion of output saved 
(or invested; investment and saving must be equal for the goods market to be in equilib-
rium in a closed economy), the higher the capital stock, and thus the higher the level of 
output in the long run.
We can think of our future period as including both the medium and the long run. 
If people, firms, and financial market participants have rational expectations, then, in 
response to the announcement of a deficit reduction, they will expect these developments 
to take place in the future. Thus, they will revise their expectation of future output 1Y′e2 
up, and their expectation of the future interest rate 1r′e2 down.
Back to the Current Period
We can now return to the question of what happens this period in response to the 
announcement and start of the deficit reduction program. Figure 16-5 draws the IS and 
LM curves for the current period. In response to the announcement of the deficit reduc-
tion, there are now three factors shifting the IS curve:
 
■
Current government spending (G) goes down, leading the IS curve to shift to the left. 
At a given interest rate (r), the decrease in government spending leads to a decrease 
In the medium run: Output, Y, 
does not change; investment, 
I, is higher.
b
In the long run:  
I increases 1  
K increases 1  
Y increases.
b
The way this is likely to hap-
pen in practice: Forecasts by 
economists will show that 
these lower deficits are likely 
to lead to higher output and 
lower interest rates in the 
future. In response to these 
forecasts, long-term interest 
rates will decrease and the 
stock market will increase. 
People and firms, reading 
these forecasts and seeing 
the increase in bond and 
stock prices, will revise their 
spending plans and increase 
spending.
b


=== PAGE 144 ===
344 
Expectations 
Extensions
in total spending and so a decrease in output. This is the standard effect of a reduc-
tion in government spending, and the only one taken into account in the basic IS-LM 
model.
 
■
Expected future output 1Y′e2 goes up, leading the IS curve to shift to the right. At 
a given interest rate, the increase in expected future output leads to an increase in 
private spending, increasing output.
 
■
The expected future interest rate 1r′e2 goes down, leading the IS curve to shift to the 
right. At a given current interest rate, a decrease in the future interest rate stimu-
lates spending and increases output.
What is the net effect of these three shifts in the IS curve? Can the effect of expecta-
tions on consumption and investment spending offset the decrease in government spend-
ing? Without much more information about the exact form of the IS relation and about 
the details of the deficit reduction program, we cannot tell which shifts will dominate 
and whether output will go up or down. But our analysis suggests that both cases are 
possible, that output may go up in response to the deficit reduction. And it gives us a few 
hints as to when this might happen:
 
■
Timing matters. Note that the smaller the decrease in current government 
spending (G), the smaller the adverse effect on spending today. Note also that 
the larger the decrease in expected future government spending 1G′e2, the larger 
the effect on expected future output and interest rates, thus the larger the favor-
able effect on spending today. This suggests that credibly backloading the defi-
cit reduction program toward the future, with small cuts today and larger cuts 
in the future, is more likely to lead to an increase in output. On the other hand, 
backloading raises an obvious issue. Announcing the need for painful cuts in 
spending, and then leaving them to the future, is likely to decrease the program’s 
credibility—the perceived probability that the government will do what it has 
promised when the time comes to do it. The government must play a delicate 
balancing act: enough cuts in the current period to show a commitment to defi-
cit reduction, enough cuts left to the future to reduce the adverse effects on the 
economy in the short run.
Current real interest rate, r
Current output, Y
LM
r
IS
D
e > 0
D
e < 0
DG < 0
Y
r
Figure 16-5
The Effects of a Deficit 
Reduction on Current 
Output
When account is taken of 
its effect on expectations, 
the decrease in government 
spending need not lead to a 
decrease in output.


=== PAGE 145 ===
 
Chapter 16 
Expectations, Output, and Policy 
345
Can a Budget Deficit Reduction Lead to an Output 
Expansion? Ireland in the 1980s
Ireland went through two major deficit reduction programs 
in the 1980s.
1. The first program was started in 1982. In 1981, the 
budget deficit had reached a high 13% of GDP. Govern-
ment debt, the result of the accumulation of current 
and past deficits, was 77% of GDP, also a high level. 
The Irish government clearly had to regain control of 
its finances. Over the next three years, it embarked on 
a program of deficit reduction, based mostly on tax in-
creases. This was an ambitious program. Had output 
continued to grow at its normal growth rate, the pro-
gram would have reduced the deficit by 5% of GDP.
The results, however, were dismal. As shown in 
line 2 of Table 1, output growth was low in 1982 and 
negative in 1983. Low output growth was associated 
with a major increase in unemployment, from 9.5% in 
1981 to 15% in 1984 (line 3). Because of low output 
growth, tax revenues—which depend on the level of 
economic activity—were lower than anticipated. The 
actual deficit reduction from 1981 to 1984, shown in 
line 1, was only 3.5% of GDP. And the result of con-
tinuing high deficits and low GDP growth was a further 
increase in the ratio of debt to GDP to 97% in 1984.
2. A second attempt to reduce budget deficits was made 
starting in February 1987. Things were still very bad. 
The 1986 deficit was 10.7% of GDP; debt stood at 116% 
of GDP, a record high in Europe at the time. The new 
program of deficit reduction was different from the first: 
It focused more on reducing the role of government and 
cutting government spending than on increasing taxes. 
Tax increases were achieved through a tax reform that 
widened the tax base—increasing the number of house-
holds paying taxes—rather than through an increase in 
the marginal tax rate. The program was again ambi-
tious. Had output grown at its normal rate, the reduc-
tion in the deficit would have been 6.4% of GDP.
The results of the second program could not have 
been more different from the results of the first. The years 
1987 to 1989 were years of strong growth, with average 
GDP growth exceeding 5%. The unemployment rate was 
reduced by almost 2%. Because of strong output growth, 
tax revenues were higher than anticipated, and the defi-
cit was reduced by nearly 9% of GDP.
A number of economists have argued that the striking differ-
ence between the results of the two programs can be traced 
to the different reaction of expectations in each case. The 
first program, they argue, focused on tax increases and did 
not change what many people saw as too large a role of gov-
ernment in the economy. The second program, with its focus 
on cuts in spending and on tax reform, had a much more 
positive impact on expectations, and so a positive impact on 
spending and output.
Are these economists right? One variable, the household 
saving rate—defined as disposable income minus consump-
tion, divided by disposable income—strongly suggests that 
expectations are an important part of the story. To inter-
pret the behavior of the saving rate, recall the lessons from 
Chapter 15 about consumption behavior. When dispos-
able income grows unusually slowly or falls—as it does in a 
recession—consumption typically slows down or declines by less 
than disposable income because people expect things to improve 
in the future. Put another way, when the growth of disposable 
income is unusually low, the saving rate typically comes down. 
Now look (in line 4) at what happened from 1981 to 1984. 
Despite low growth throughout the period and a recession in 
1983, the household saving rate actually increased slightly dur-
ing the period. Put another way, people reduced their consump-
tion by more than the reduction in their disposable income: The 
reason must be that they were pessimistic about the future.
Now turn to the period 1987 to 1989. During that 
period, economic growth was unusually strong. By the same 
argument as in the previous paragraph, we would have 
expected consumption to increase less strongly and thus 
the saving rate to increase. Instead, the saving rate dropped 
sharply, from 15.7% in 1986 to 12.6% in 1989. Consumers 
must have become much more optimistic about the future 
to increase their consumption by more than the increase in 
their disposable income.
FOCUS
Table 1 
Fiscal and Other Macroeconomic Indicators in Ireland, 1981 to 1984, and 1986 to 1989
1981
1982
1983
1984
1986
1987
1988
1989
1
Budget deficit (% of GDP)
-13.0
-13.4
-11.4
-9.5
-10.7
-8.6
-4.5
-1.8
2
Output growth rate (%)
3.3
2.3
-0.2
4.4
-0.4
4.7
5.2
5.8
3
Unemployment rate (%)
9.5
11.0
13.5
15.0
16.1
16.9
16.3
15.1
4
Household saving rate
(% of disposable income)
17.9
19.6
18.1
18.4
15.7
12.9
11.0
12.6
Source: OECD Economic Outlook, June 1998.


=== PAGE 146 ===
346 
Expectations 
Extensions
 
■
Composition matters. How much of the reduction in the deficit is achieved by rais-
ing taxes and how much by cutting spending may be important. If some government 
spending programs are perceived as “wasteful,” cutting these programs today will allow 
the government to cut taxes in the future. Expectations of lower future taxes and lower 
distortions could induce firms to invest today, thus raising output in the short run.
 
■
The initial situation matters. Take an economy where the government appears to 
have, in effect, lost control of its budget. Government spending is high, tax revenues 
are low, and the deficit is large. Government debt is increasing fast. In such an envi-
ronment, a credible deficit reduction program is more likely to increase output in the 
short run. Before the announcement of the program, people may expect major polit-
ical and economic troubles in the future. The announcement of a program of deficit 
reduction may reassure them that the government has regained control and that 
the future is less bleak than they anticipated. This decrease in pessimism about the 
future may lead to an increase in spending and output, even if taxes are increased 
as part of the deficit reduction program. Investors who thought that the government 
might default on the debt and were asking for a large risk premium may conclude 
that the risk of default is much lower and ask for much lower interest rates. Lower 
interest rates for the government are likely to translate into lower interest rates for 
firms and people.
 
■
Monetary policy matters. The three previous arguments focused on the direction of 
the shift in the IS curve, with no change in monetary policy. But as we have discussed 
before, even if it cannot fully offset the effect of an adverse shift in the IS curve, mon-
etary policy can, by decreasing the policy rate, help reduce the adverse effects of the 
shift on output.
Let’s summarize.
A program of deficit reduction may increase output even in the short run. Whether 
it does or does not depends on many factors:
 
■
The credibility of the program: Will spending be cut or taxes increased in the future 
as announced?
 
■
The composition of the program: Does the program remove some of the distortions 
in the economy?
 
■
The state of government finances in the first place: How large is the initial deficit? Is 
this a “last chance” program? What will happen if it fails?
Note how far we have moved 
from the results of Chapter 3, 
where, by choosing spending 
and taxes wisely, the govern-
ment could achieve any level 
of output it wanted. Here, 
even the sign of the effect of 
a deficit reduction on output 
is ambiguous. More on cur-
rent fiscal policy issues in 
Chapter 22.
c
The next question is whether this difference in the 
adjustment of  expectations over the two episodes can be 
attributed fully to the differences in the two fiscal programs. 
The answer is no. Ireland was changing in many ways at 
the time of  the second fiscal program. Productivity was 
increasing much faster than real wages, reducing the cost 
of  labor for firms. Attracted by tax breaks, low labor costs, 
and an educated labor force, many foreign firms were relo-
cating to Ireland and building new plants. These factors 
played a major role in the expansion of  the late 1980s, and 
Irish growth remained very strong—usually more than 5% 
per year—until the crisis in 2007. The long expansion was 
doubtless due to many factors, but the change in fiscal pol-
icy in 1987 probably played an important role in convinc-
ing people, firms—including foreign firms—and financial 
markets that the government was regaining control of  its 
finances. And the fact remains that the substantial deficit 
reduction of  1987–1989 was accompanied by a strong out-
put expansion, not by the recession predicted by the basic 
IS-LM model.
For a more detailed discussion, look at Francesco Giavazzi and 
Marco Pagano, “Can Severe Fiscal Contractions Be Expansionary? 
Tales of Two Small European Countries,” NBER Macroeconomics 
Annual (MIT Press, 1990), Olivier Jean Blanchard and Stanley 
Fischer, editors.
For a more systematic look at whether and when fiscal con-
solidations have been expansionary (and a mostly nega-
tive answer), see “Will It Hurt? Macroeconomic Effects of 
Fiscal Consolidation,” Chapter 3, World Economic Outlook, 
International Monetary Fund, October 2010.


=== PAGE 147 ===
 
Chapter 16 
Expectations, Output, and Policy 
347
 
■
Monetary and other policies: Will they help offset the direct adverse effect on demand 
in the short run?
This gives you a sense of both the importance of expectations in determining the 
outcome and the complexities involved in the use of fiscal policy in such a context. And it 
is far more than an illustrative example. This has been a major bone of contention in the 
euro area since the beginning of 2010.
By 2010, the sharp economic downturn, together with the fiscal measures 
to limit the fall in demand during 2009, had led to large budget deficits and large 
increases in government debt. There was little question that the large deficits could 
not go on forever, and debt had to be eventually stabilized. The question was when 
and at what pace?
Some economists, and most of the policymakers in the euro area, believed that 
fiscal consolidation had to start immediately and be strong. They argued that this 
was essential to convince investors that the fiscal situation was under control. They 
argued that, if coupled with structural reforms to increase future output, the effect 
through anticipations of higher output later would dominate the direct adverse 
effects of consolidation. They argued for what became known as fiscal austerity. 
For example, the president of the European Central Bank, Jean Claude Trichet, said 
in September 2010:
“[Fiscal consolidation] is a prerequisite for maintaining confidence in the credibility 
of governments’ fiscal targets. Positive effects on confidence can compensate for the 
reduction in demand stemming from fiscal consolidation, when fiscal adjustment 
strategies are perceived as credible, ambitious and focused on the expenditure side. 
The conditions for such positive effects are particularly favourable in the current 
environment of macroeconomic uncertainty.”
Others were skeptical that, in a depressed environment, the positive expectation 
effects would be strong. They pointed out that the policy rate was already at the zero 
lower bound, and so monetary policy could not help much, if at all. They argued for a 
slow and steady fiscal consolidation, even if it were to lead to higher levels of debt until 
debt stabilized.
The debate became known as the fiscal multipliers debate. Those in favor of strong 
consolidation argued that the fiscal multipliers—the net effects of fiscal consolidation 
once direct and expectation effects were taken into account—were likely to be negative. 
Smaller deficits would lead, other things being equal, to an increase in output. Those 
against consolidation argued that fiscal multipliers were likely to be positive and possi-
bly large. Smaller deficits would lead to a decrease in output, or at least slow down the 
recovery.
The skeptics turned out, unfortunately, to be right. As evidence accumulated, it 
became clear that the net effect of fiscal consolidation was contractionary. The stron-
gest evidence was the relation between forecast errors and the size of fiscal consolidation 
across countries. In most euro countries, growth in 2010 and 2011 turned out to be 
much lower than had been forecast. Looking across countries, the negative forecast errors 
were closely correlated with the size of fiscal consolidation. As shown in Figure 16-6, 
which plots growth forecast errors against a measure of fiscal consolidation, countries 
with larger fiscal consolidations showed a larger (negative) forecast error. This was par-
ticularly striking in the case of Greece, but was true of other countries as well. Given that 
the forecasts had been constructed using models that implied small positive multipliers, 
this evidence implied that the fiscal multipliers were in fact not only positive, but larger 
than had been assumed. Expectation effects did not offset the adverse direct effects of 
lower spending and higher taxes.


=== PAGE 148 ===
348 
Expectations 
Extensions
2
Forecast of Fiscal Consolidation
Growth Forecast Error
4
6
0
22
210
25
0
5
ROM
GRC
DEU
SWE
FINMLT
POL
BEL
IRL
CYP
DNK
NOR
CHE
AUT
ISL
GBR
SPN
SVK
PRT
FRA
CZEHUN
NLDITA
BGR
ESP
Figure 16-6
Growth Forecast Errors 
and Fiscal Consolidation 
in Europe, 2010–2011
European countries with stron-
ger fiscal consolidations in 
2010 and 2011 had larger neg-
ative growth forecast errors.
Uncertainty and Fluctuations
The future is, by its nature, uncertain. We hold expectations 
about the outcome, but we realize that the outcome is uncer-
tain. So far, we have focused on the effect of expectations 
on consumption and investment decisions and ignored this 
uncertainty. But, for given expectations, uncertainty is likely 
to affect our decisions as well.
Consider three examples.
Picture two scenarios. In the first, you are sure that, a 
year from now, you will be promoted and your salary will 
be increased by 10%. In the second, you think that there is 
a 50% chance you will be promoted and your wage will be 
increased by 40%, and a 50% chance you will be fired, in 
which case you are confident that you can find another job, 
but at a wage 20% below your current wage. Your expected 
income is the same in both cases, namely higher by 10%. 
Will your consumption this year be the same under both sce-
narios? Probably not. In the second scenario, you are likely to 
be more careful and increase consumption by less.
Suppose now that you are the CEO of a firm and you hear 
that there may be a tariff war that may affect some of your 
sales abroad. The rumors are vague, the list of products that 
might be affected is not clear. In other words, and in contrast 
to the previous case, you are unable to even form an opin-
ion about probabilities and outcomes. This is very likely to 
lead you to be extremely prudent and to cancel a number of 
investment plans that you were considering earlier.
Continue with the previous example but assume that you 
are confident that the uncertainty will be resolved within a 
year: you will know whether there is a tariff and whether 
and how it affects your business. Then, if investment deci-
sions are difficult to reverse, it makes a lot of sense for you 
to wait to make those decisions until the uncertainty will be 
resolved. Economists refer to such situations as reflecting the 
option value of  waiting. Making what turns out to be the 
wrong investment decision can be very costly; waiting until 
the uncertainty is resolved and the right decision can be 
made may be much less costly.
I have focused on individual decisions. But if many people 
or many firms are subject to such uncertainty, this may have 
major macroeconomic effects. Here are three examples.
The first dates back to the Great Depression. When the 
stock market collapsed in October 1929, people realized that 
the future was going to be worse than they had anticipated. But 
they also perceived the future as being much more uncertain. 
Was the stock market collapse a temporary event, or was it 
going to trigger a long and painful recession? Christina Romer, 
of Berkeley, argues that both lower expectations and higher 
perceived uncertainty were at work. Her argument: Sales of 
automobiles plummeted in October and November. But sales 
of department stores barely budged. If only lower expecta-
tions had been at work, both sales of automobiles and sales at 
department stores should have come down. The fact that sales 
of automobiles went down a lot, while sales at department 
stores remained roughly the same, suggests that uncertainty 
and the option value of waiting were at work. Not knowing 
what was going to happen, consumers decided to wait and see 
before buying a car. This behavior in turn contributed to the fall 
in demand and the speed at which the US economy collapsed.
The second refers to the Great Recession. After the collapse of 
Lehman in September 2008 (see Chapter 6), it became clear that 
the financial system was in serious trouble. But assessing how bad 
things were, and guessing what might happen, was extremely 
FOCUS


=== PAGE 149 ===
 
■Private spending in the goods market depends on current 
and expected future output and on current and expected 
future real interest rates.
 
■Expectations affect demand and, in turn, output. Changes in 
expected future output or in the expected future real interest 
rate lead to changes in spending and in output today.
 
■By implication, the effects of fiscal and monetary policy 
on spending and output depend on how the policy affects 
expectations of future output and real interest rates.
 
■The assumption of rational expectations is the assumption 
that people, firms, and participants in financial markets form 
expectations of the future by assessing the course of future 
expected policy and then working out the implications for 
future output, future interest rates, and so on. Although it is 
clear that most people do not go through this exercise them-
selves, we can think of them as doing so indirectly by relying 
on the predictions of public and private forecasters.
 
■Although there are surely cases in which people, firms, or finan-
cial investors do not have rational expectations, the assump-
tion of rational expectations seems to be the best benchmark to 
evaluate the potential effects of alternative policies. Designing 
a policy on the assumption that people will make systematic 
mistakes in responding to it would be unwise.
difficult. (I know; I was at the IMF at the time.) A measure of the 
degree of uncertainty that prevailed in financial markets is given 
in Figure 1, which plots the evolution of a stock market volatil-
ity index, called the VIX. The VIX is computed using the prices of 
options on buying or selling stocks at a given price in the future. 
If investors are worried that the stock market may collapse, they 
will be willing to pay a high price to have the option to sell at a 
given price in the future. Conversely, if they expect the stock mar-
ket to recover rapidly, they will be willing to pay a high price to 
have the option to buy at a given price in the future. The VIX is 
constructed by aggregating this information, and gives a sense of 
the uncertainty in the market at a given point in time. Figure 1 
shows how sharply the VIX went up in September and October 
2008, reflecting the large increase in uncertainty at the time and 
contributing to a sharp decline in demand and a deep recession. 
It also shows how fast the smoke cleared, and how fast it went 
down and has remained low since then.
The third example deals with current trade tensions. 
Since the 2016 election, the Trump administration has 
argued that tariffs on US exports were too high and should 
be reduced. Talks with Mexico, China, and the European 
Union are ongoing. There is, however, substantial uncer-
tainty as to what the final outcome will be. In that con-
text, you would expect firms, in particular exporting 
firms, to put some investment on hold and to wait until 
the outcome of  the talks is clearer. This is indeed what the 
evidence shows. A survey of  firms by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of  Atlanta in January 2019 shows that 19% of 
them were reassessing their investment plans as a result 
of  the tariff  discussions. Of  those, 36% were postpon-
ing some of  their plans. The option value of  waiting was 
clearly at work, not enough to lead to a large decrease in 
overall investment but enough to be noticeable in aggre-
gate data.
Figure 1
The Evolution of the VIX since 2007
Source: FRED, VIXCLS
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
2007-01
2007-08
2008-03
2008-10
2009-05
2009-12
2010-07
2011-02
2011-09
2012-04
2012-11
2013-06
2014-01
2014-08
2015-03
2015-10
2016-05
2016-12
2017-07
2018-02
2018-09
SUMMARY
 
Chapter 16 
Expectations, Output, and Policy 
349


=== PAGE 150 ===
350 
Expectations 
Extensions
 
■The central bank controls the short-term real interest rate. 
Spending, however, depends instead on current and expected 
future real interest rates. Thus, the effect of monetary policy 
on activity depends crucially on whether and how changes 
in the short-term real interest rate lead to changes in current 
and expected future real interest rates.
 
■A budget deficit reduction may lead to an increase rather 
than a decrease in output. This is because expectations 
of  higher output and lower interest rates in the future 
may lead to an increase in spending that more than off-
sets the reduction in spending from the direct effect of 
the deficit reduction on total spending. Whether it does 
depends on the pace, credibility, nature of  the deficit 
reduction, and the ability of  monetary policy to accom-
modate and sustain demand.
KEY TERMS
aggregate private spending, or private spending, 337
animal spirits, 341
static expectations, 341
adaptive expectations, 341
rational expectations, 342
backloading, 344
credibility, 344
fiscal austerity, 347
fiscal multipliers, 347
option value of waiting, 348
VIX, 349
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using the information in this chapter, label each of the following 
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. Changes in the current one-year real interest rate are likely 
to have a much larger effect on spending than changes in 
expected future one-year real interest rates.
b. The introduction of expectations in the goods market 
model makes the IS curve flatter, although it is still down-
ward sloping.
c. Investment depends on current and expected future inter-
est rates.
d. The rational expectations assumption implies that con-
sumers take into account the effects of future fiscal policy 
on output.
e. Expected future fiscal policy affects expected future eco-
nomic activity but not current economic activity.
f. Depending on its effect on expectations, a fiscal contrac-
tion may actually lead to an economic expansion.
g. Ireland’s experience with deficit reduction programs in 1982 
and 1987 provides strong evidence against the hypothesis 
that deficit reduction can lead to an output expansion.
h. The Euro area experience in 2010 and 2011 suggests that 
fiscal consolidations, through expectations, lead to sub-
stantial increases in output growth.
2. Consider these quotes concerning Federal Reserve policy.
a. On January 25, 2012 the Federal Reserve made two announce-
ments. Here are excerpts from each:
The announcement about the path of short-term interest rates:
To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that 
inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with the dual mandate, the 
Committee expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for 
monetary policy. In particular, the Committee decided today to keep 
the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4% and currently 
anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of resource 
utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—
are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate 
at least through late 2014.
The formal announcement of an inflation target:
The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by 
monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify 
a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee judges that inflation 
at the rate of 2%, as measured by the annual change in the price 
index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent 
over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. 
Communicating this inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep 
longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby foster-
ing price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhanc-
ing the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in 
the face of significant economic disturbances.
What do you think was the combined goal of the two 
announcements? What do they imply about real interest 
rates?
b. The monetary policy announcement December 19, 2018:
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee 
met in November indicates that the labor market has continued to 
strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a strong 
rate. Job gains have been strong, on average, in recent months, and 
the unemployment rate has remained low. Household spending 
has continued to grow strongly, while growth of business fixed 
investment has moderated from its rapid pace earlier in the year. 
On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items 
other than food and energy remain near 2%. Indicators of longer-
term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance.
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee 
seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The 
Committee judges that some further gradual increases in the 


=== PAGE 151 ===
 
Chapter 16 
Expectations, Output, and Policy 
351
target range for the federal funds rate will be consistent with sus-
tained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market condi-
tions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2% objective 
over the medium term.
In view of  realized and expected labor market conditions 
and inflation, the Committee decided to raise the target range 
for the federal funds rate to 2-1/4 to 2-1/2%.
What happened to the target range for the policy 
interest rate in this announcement? What information 
was given about the future course of policy interest rates? 
How was the decision justified? Can you make an infer-
ence about the value of the neutral policy rate of interest 
from this announcement?
3. For each of the changes in expectations in parts a through d, 
determine whether there is a shift in the IS curve, the LM curve, 
both curves, or neither. In each case assume that no other exogenous  
variable is changing.
a. a decrease in the expected future real interest rate
b. an increase in the current real policy interest rate
c. an increase in expected future taxes
d. a decrease in expected future income
4. Consider the following statement: “The rational expectations 
assumption is unrealistic because, essentially, it amounts to the 
assumption that every consumer has perfect knowledge of the 
economy.” Discuss.
5. A new president, who promised during the campaign that she 
would cut taxes, has just been elected. People trust that she will 
keep her promise, but expect that the tax cuts will be implemented 
only in the future. Determine the impact of the election victory on 
current output, the current interest rate, and current private spend-
ing under each of the assumptions in parts a through c. In each 
case, indicate what you think will happen to Y′e, r′e, and T′e, and 
then how these changes in expectations affect output today.
a. The Fed will not change its current policy rate, but does 
not make a commitment as to the direction of rates in 
the future.
b. The Fed will act to prevent any change in current and 
future output.
c. The Fed will not change either the current real policy inter-
est rate or the future real policy interest rate.
6. The Irish deficit reduction packages
The Focus Box “Can a Budget Deficit Reduction Lead to an 
Output Expansion? Ireland in the 1980s” provides an example of 
fiscal consolidation. Ireland had a large budget deficit in 1981 and 
1982.
a. What does a deficit reduction imply for the medium run 
and the long run? What are the advantages of reducing the 
deficit?
b. The box discusses two deficit reduction programs. How did 
they differ?
c. The box presents evidence that the two deficit reduction 
programs had different effects on household expectations. 
What is that evidence?
d. Although the data show strong output growth from 1987 
to 1989, there is some evidence of continued macroeco-
nomic weakness in Ireland during the second fiscal con-
solidation. What is that evidence?
DIG DEEPER
7. A new Federal Reserve chairman
Suppose, in a hypothetical economy, that the chairman of 
the Fed unexpectedly announces that he will retire in one year. At 
the same time, the President announces her nominee to replace the 
retiring Fed chair. Financial market participants expect the nominee 
to be confirmed by Congress. They also believe that the nominee will 
conduct a more contractionary monetary policy in the future. In 
other words, market participants expect the policy interest rate to 
increase in the future.
a. Consider the present to be the last year of the current Fed 
chair’s term and the future to be the time after that. Given 
that monetary policy will be more contractionary in the 
future, what will happen to future interest rates and future 
output? Given these expected changes in future output and 
future interest rates, what will happen to output and the 
interest rate in the present? What will happen to the yield 
curve on the day of the announcement that the current 
Fed chair will retire in one year?
Now suppose that instead of making an unexpected announce-
ment, the Fed chair is required by law to retire in one year (there 
are limits on the term of the Fed chair), and financial market par-
ticipants have been aware of this for some time. Suppose, as in part 
a, that the president nominates a replacement who is expected to 
raise interest rates more than the current Fed chair.
b. Suppose financial market participants are not surprised by 
the president’s choice. In other words, market participants 
had correctly predicted whom the president would choose as 
nominee. Under these circumstances, is the announcement 
of the nominee likely to have any effect on the yield curve?
c. Suppose instead that the identity of the nominee is a sur-
prise and that financial market participants had expected 
the nominee to be someone who favored an even more 
contractionary policy than the actual nominee. Under 
these circumstances, what is likely to happen to the yield 
curve on the day of the announcement? (Hint: Be careful. 
Compared to what was expected, is the actual nominee 
expected to follow a more contractionary or more expan-
sionary policy?)
d. On November 2, 2017, Jerome Powell was nominated to 
succeed Janet Yellen as chair of the Federal Reserve. You 
can find the 10-year bond yield on a daily basis (FRED 
variable DGS10) as well as the daily level of the Dow Jones 
average (FRED variable DJCA). Are there changes in stock 
prices or bond yields that suggest financial market partici-
pants were surprised by the choice of Powell? You could 
also do a yield curve analysis of the kind described in 
Problem 8 for the period around Powell’s nomination. If 
you do this, use the one- and 10-year interest rates.)


=== PAGE 152 ===
352 
Expectations 
Extensions
EXPLORE FURTHER
8. Deficits and fiscal consolidation
As seen in the following table, the 2008 financial crisis 
left the United States with an enormous federal budget deficit 
in 2009.
There was a substantial fiscal consolidation from 2011 
onward, yet real output continued to grow.
a. Which played a larger role in the fiscal consolidation: rais-
ing taxes, or reducing outlays?
b. In terms of the language of the text, if this fiscal consoli-
dation were anticipated as of 2009, was it “backloaded?” 
How might this help minimize the effects of the fiscal con-
solidation on output growth?
c. We know from Question 2 and from Chapters 4 and 6 that 
monetary policy maintained the nominal policy rate of 
interest of close to 0% throughout this period and prom-
ised to maintain low interest rates into the future. Why did 
it do so?
d. The Federal Reserve introduced a target rate of inflation 
during the consolidation period on January 25, 2012. 
What is one advantage of introducing a policy where infla-
tion is targeted at 2% during a period of zero interest rates 
and fiscal consolidation?
e. We used the University of Michigan’s Index of Consumer 
Sentiment in the previous chapter as a measure of expec-
tations of households about the future. You can look at the 
values of this index at the FRED database maintained by 
the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (series UMCSENT). 
Find this index and comment on its evolution from 2010 
to 2014 as the fiscal consolidation proceeded.
Fiscal Consolidation in the United States 2009–2014
Year
Receipts  
(% of GDP)
Outlays  
(% of GDP)
Surplus or 
Deficit (–)  
(% of GDP)
Growth in 
Real GDP (%)
2008
17.1
20.2
-3.1
-0.3
2009
14.6
24.4
-9.8
-2.8
2010
14.6
23.4
-8.7
2.5
2011
15.0
23.4
-8.5
1.6
2012
15.3
22.1
-6.8
2.3
2013
16.7
20.8
-4.1
2.2
2014
17.5
20.3
-2.8
2.4
(Source: Table B-1, Table B-20, Economic Report of the 
President 2015.)
FURTHER READINGS
 
■For a general discussion of the effects of uncertainty on 
the macroeconomy, read “Fluctuations in Uncertainty” 
by Nicolas Bloom, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 
2014.
 
■For more evidence on the effects of uncertainty, go to the 
site www.policyuncertainty.com, which gives the evolution 
of a number of indexes of uncertainty for a large number 
of countries.
 
■The study of the effects of tariffs on US firms’ decisions is 
available at https://macroblog.typepad.com/macroblog/ 
2019/02/tariff-worries-and-us-business-investment- 
take-two.html.


=== PAGE 153 ===
 
353
Chapter 19
Chapter 19 characterizes the equilibrium in goods and financial markets in an open 
economy. In other words, it gives an open economy version of the IS-LM model we 
saw in the core. It shows how, under flexible exchange rates, monetary policy affects 
output through its effect not only on the interest rate but also on the exchange rate. 
Fixing the exchange rate also implies giving up the ability to change the interest rate.
Chapter 20
Chapter 20 looks at the properties of different exchange rate regimes. It shows that, 
in the medium run, the real exchange rate can adjust even under a fixed exchange 
rate regime. The chapter then looks at exchange rate crises under fixed exchange 
rates, and at movements in exchange rates under flexible exchange rates. It ends by 
discussing the pros and cons of various exchange rate regimes, including the adop-
tion of a common currency such as the euro.
Chapter 18
Chapter 18 focuses on equilibrium in the goods market in an open economy: the 
demand for domestic goods now depends also on the real exchange rate. It shows 
how fiscal policy affects both output and the trade balance. It discusses the conditions 
under which a real depreciation improves the trade balance and increases output.
Chapter 17
Chapter 17 discusses the implications of openness in goods markets and financial 
markets. Openness in goods markets allows people to choose between domestic 
goods and foreign goods. An important determinant of their decisions is the real 
exchange rate—the relative price of domestic goods in terms of foreign goods. 
Openness in financial markets allows people to choose between domestic assets 
and foreign assets. This imposes a tight relation between the exchange rate, both 
 current and expected, and domestic and foreign interest rates—a relation known as 
the  interest parity condition.
The Open Economy
The next four chapters cover the second extension of the 
core. They look at the implications of openness—the fact 
that most economies trade both goods and assets with the 
rest of the world.
EXTENSIONS


=== PAGE 154 ===
This page is intentionally left blank


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 154 ===
This page is intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 155 ===
355
Openness in Goods 
and Financial 
Markets
W
e have assumed until now that the economy we looked at was closed—that 
it did not interact with the rest of the world. We had to start this way to keep 
things simple and to build up intuition for the basic macroeconomic mecha-
nisms. Figure 17-1, which repeats for convenience Figure 1-1, shows how bad, 
in fact, this assumption is. The figure plots the growth rates for advanced and emerging 
economies since 2005. What is striking is how the growth rates have moved together. Even 
though the crisis originated in the United States, the outcome was a worldwide recession with 
negative growth in advanced economies and much lower growth in emerging economies. It 
is therefore time to dismiss our closed economy assumption. Understanding the macroeco-
nomic implications of openness will occupy us for this and the next three chapters.
Openness has three distinct dimensions:
1. Openness in goods markets—the ability of consumers and firms to choose between domes-
tic goods and foreign goods. In no country is this choice completely free of restrictions. Even 
the countries most committed to free trade have tariffs—taxes on imported goods—and 
 quotas—restrictions on the quantity of goods that can be imported—on at least some foreign 
goods. At the same time, in most countries, average tariffs are low and, until recently, were 
getting lower.
2. Openness in financial markets—the ability of financial investors to choose between domes-
tic assets and foreign assets. Not long ago, even some of the richest countries in the world, 
such as France and Italy, had strong capital controls—restrictions on the foreign assets their 
domestic residents could hold and the domestic assets foreigners could hold. Capital controls 
are much more limited today. As a result, world financial markets are becoming more closely 
integrated.
3. Openness in factor markets—the ability of firms to choose where to locate production and of 
workers to choose where to work. Here also trends have been clear. Multinational companies 
operate plants in many countries and move their operations around the world to take advan-
tage of low costs. Much of the debate about the North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA) signed in 1993 by the United States, Canada, and Mexico centered on how it would 
affect the relocation of US firms to Mexico. Similar fears now center on China. And immigration 
from low-wage countries is a hot political issue throughout Europe and in the United States.
In the short run and in the medium run—the focus of this and the next three chapters— 
openness in factor markets plays much less of a role than openness in either goods markets or 
financial markets. Thus, we shall ignore openness in factor markets and focus on the implications 
of the first two dimensions of openness here.
17


=== PAGE 156 ===
356 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Section 17-1 looks at openness in goods markets, determinants of the choice between 
domestic and foreign goods, and the role of the real exchange rate.
Section 17-2 looks at openness in financial markets, determinants of the choice between 
domestic and foreign assets, and the role of interest rates and exchange rates.
Section 17-3 gives a map to the next three chapters.
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Growth Rate (percent)
24
22
0
2
4
6
8
10
World
Advanced economies
Emerging and developing economies
Figure 17-1
Growth in Advanced and 
Emerging Economies 
since 2000
Advanced, emerging, and 
developing economies move 
very much together.
Source: IMF, World Economic 
Outlook, Oct 2015. Used courtesy 
of IMF.
From Chapter 3: The trade 
balance is the difference 
between exports and imports:
If exports exceed 
imports, there is a trade 
 surplus (equivalently, a 
 positive trade balance).
If imports exceed 
exports, there is a trade 
deficit (equivalently, a 
negative trade balance).
c
If you remember one basic message from this chapter, it should be: When looking 
at an open economy, we have to think about both the choice of domestic versus 
foreign goods and that of domestic versus foreign assets. 
17-1  OPENNESS IN GOODS MARKETS
Let’s start by looking at how much the United States sells to and buys from the rest of 
the world. Then we shall be better able to think about the choice between domestic goods 
and foreign goods, and the role of the relative price of domestic goods in terms of foreign 
goods—the real exchange rate.
Exports and Imports
Figure 17-2 plots the evolution of US exports and US imports, as ratios to GDP, since 
1960 (“US exports” means exports from the United States; “US imports” means imports 
to the United States). The figure suggests two main conclusions:
 
■
The US economy is becoming more open over time. Exports and imports, which were 
equal to 5% of GDP in the early 1960s, are now equal to about 14% of GDP (12.3% 
for exports, 15.4% for imports). In other words, the United States trades roughly 
three times as much (relative to its GDP) with the rest of the world than it did 50 
years ago.
 
■
Although imports and exports have followed the same upward trend, since the late 
1970s imports have consistently exceeded exports. Put another way, for the last 40 
years, the United States has consistently run a trade deficit. For four years in a row in 
the mid-2000s, the ratio of the trade deficit to GDP exceeded 5% of GDP. Although 
it has decreased since the beginning of the crisis, it remains large today, at 3%. 


=== PAGE 157 ===
 
Chapter 17 
Openness in Goods and Financial Markets 
357
Understanding the sources and implications of this large deficit is an important issue 
and one to which we shall return later.
Given all the talk in the media about globalization, a volume of trade (measured by 
the average of the ratios of exports and imports to GDP) around 14% of GDP might strike 
you as small. However, the volume of trade is not necessarily a good measure of open-
ness. Many firms are exposed to foreign competition, but by being competitive and keep-
ing their prices low enough, these firms are able to retain their domestic market share 
and limit imports. This suggests that a better index of openness than export or import 
ratios is the proportion of aggregate output composed of tradable goods—goods that 
compete with foreign goods in either domestic markets or foreign markets. Estimates are 
that tradable goods represent about 60% of aggregate output in the United States today.
With exports around 12.3% of GDP, it is true that the United States has one of the 
smallest ratios of exports to GDP among the rich countries of the world. Table 17-1 gives 
ratios for a number of OECD countries.
The United States is at the low end of the range of export ratios. Japan’s ratio is a bit 
higher, the United Kingdom’s nearly three times as large, and Germany’s four times as 
large. The smaller European countries have very large ratios, from 65.0% in Switzerland 
to 86.4% in the Netherlands. (The high Netherlands ratio of exports to GDP raises an odd 
possibility: Can a country have exports larger than its GDP; in other words, can a country 
have an export ratio greater than one? The answer is yes. The reason why is given in the 
Focus Box “Can Exports Exceed GDP?”.)
Tradable goods: cars, 
 computers, pharmaceuticals, 
etc. Nontradable goods: 
 housing, most medical 
 services,  haircuts, etc.
b
For more on the OECD, see 
Chapter 1.
b
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
12.0
14.0
16.0
18.0
20.0
1960
1963
1966
1969
1972
1975
1978
1981
1984
1987
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008
2011
2014
2017
Percent of GDP
Exports/GDP
Imports/GDP
Figure 17-2
US Exports and Imports 
as Ratios to GDP since 
1960
Since 1960, US exports and 
imports have roughly tri-
pled in relation to GDP. The 
United States has become a 
much more open economy.
Source:  Series GDP, EXPGS, 
IMPGS. Federal Reserve 
Economic Data (FRED) https://
research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/
Table 17-1  Ratios of Exports to GDP for Selected OECD Countries, 2017
Source: World Bank database, exports
Country
Export Ratio
Country
Export Ratio
United States
12.3%
Germany
47.2%
Japan
16.1%
Austria
53.9%
Chile
28.7%
Switzerland
65.0%
United Kingdom
30.5%
Netherlands
86.4%


=== PAGE 158 ===
358 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Do these numbers indicate that the United States has higher trade barriers than, say, 
the United Kingdom or the Netherlands? No. The main factors behind these differences 
are geography and size. Distance from other markets explains a good part of the lower 
Japanese ratio. Size also matters; the smaller the country, the more it must specialize in 
producing and exporting only a few products and rely on imports for the other products. 
The Netherlands can hardly afford to produce the range of goods produced by the United 
States, a country roughly 20 times its economic size.
The Choice between Domestic Goods and Foreign Goods
How does openness in goods markets force us to rethink the way we look at equilibrium 
in the goods market?
Until now, when we were thinking about consumers’ decisions in the goods 
 market, we focused on their decision to save or to consume. When goods markets are 
open, domestic consumers face a second decision: whether to buy domestic or foreign 
goods. Indeed, all buyers—including domestic and foreign firms and governments—
face the same decision. This decision has a direct effect on domestic output. If buyers 
decide to buy more domestic goods, the demand for domestic goods increases, and so 
does domestic output. If they decide to buy more foreign goods, then foreign output 
increases instead of domestic output.
Central to this second decision (to buy domestic or foreign goods) is the price of 
domestic goods relative to foreign goods. We call this relative price the real exchange 
rate. The real exchange rate is not directly observable, and you will not find it in the 
newspapers. What you will find in newspapers are nominal exchange rates, the relative 
prices of currencies. So we start by looking at nominal exchange rates and then see how 
we can use them to construct real exchange rates.
Nominal Exchange Rates
Nominal exchange rates between two currencies can be quoted in one of two ways:
 
■
As the price of the domestic currency in terms of the foreign currency. If, for example, we 
look at the United States and the United Kingdom, and think of the dollar as the domestic 
currency and the pound as the foreign currency, we can express the nominal exchange 
rate as the price of a dollar in terms of pounds. In December 2018, the exchange rate 
defined this way was 0.79. In other words, one dollar was worth 0.79 pounds.
Iceland is both isolated 
and small. What would you 
expect its export ratio to be? 
(Answer: 47%.) c
In a closed economy, people 
face one spending decision:
Save or buy (consume).
In an open economy, they 
face two spending decisions:
Save or buy.
And buy domestic or buy 
foreign.
c
Can Exports Exceed GDP?
Can a country have exports larger than its GDP—that is, can 
it have an export ratio greater than one?
It would seem that the answer must be no: A country 
cannot export more than it produces, so that the export ratio 
must be less than one. Not so. The key to the answer is to 
realize that exports and imports include intermediate goods.
Take, for example, a country that imports intermediate 
goods for $1 billion. Suppose it transforms them into final 
goods using only labor. Say labor is paid $200 million and 
that there are no profits. The value of these final goods is 
thus equal to $1,200 million. Assume that $1 billion worth 
of final goods is exported and the rest, $200 million, is con-
sumed domestically.
Exports and imports therefore both equal $1 billion. 
What is GDP in this economy? Remember that GDP is value 
added in the economy (see Chapter 2). So in this example, 
GDP equals $200 million, and the ratio of exports to GDP 
equals $1000>$200 = 5.
Hence, exports can exceed GDP. This is actually the case for 
a number of small countries where most economic activity is 
organized around a harbor and import-export activities. This 
is even the case for small countries such as Singapore, where 
manufacturing plays an important role. In 2017, the ratio of 
exports to GDP in Singapore was 173%!
FOCUS


=== PAGE 159 ===
 
Chapter 17 
Openness in Goods and Financial Markets 
359
 
■
As the price of the foreign currency in terms of the domestic currency. Continuing 
with the same example, we can express the nominal exchange rate as the price of a 
pound in terms of dollars. In December 2018, the exchange rate defined this way 
was 1.26. In other words, one pound was worth 1.26 dollars.
Either definition is fine; the important thing is to remain consistent. In this text, we 
shall adopt the first definition: we shall define the nominal exchange rate as the price 
of  the domestic currency in terms of  foreign currency, and denote it by E. When looking, 
for example, at the exchange rate between the United States and the United Kingdom 
(from the viewpoint of the United States, so the dollar is the domestic currency), E will 
denote the price of a dollar in terms of pounds (thus E was 0.79 in December 2018).
Exchange rates between the dollar and most foreign currencies are determined in 
foreign exchange markets and change every day—indeed every minute of the day. These 
changes are called nominal appreciations or nominal depreciations—appreciations or depre-
ciations for short.
 
■
An appreciation of the domestic currency is an increase in the price of the domes-
tic currency in terms of a foreign currency. Given our definition of the exchange 
rate, an appreciation corresponds to an increase in the exchange rate.
 
■
A depreciation of the domestic currency is a decrease in the price of the domestic 
currency in terms of a foreign currency. So given our definition of the exchange rate, a 
depreciation of the domestic currency corresponds to a decrease in the exchange rate, E.
You may have encountered two other words to denote movements in exchange rates: 
“revaluations” and “devaluations.” These two terms are used when countries operate under 
fixed exchange rates—a system in which two or more countries maintain a constant 
exchange rate between their currencies. Under such a system, increases in the exchange 
rate—which are infrequent by definition—are called revaluations (rather than apprecia-
tions). Decreases in the exchange rate are called devaluations (rather than depreciations).
Figure 17-3 plots the nominal exchange rate between the dollar and the pound 
since 1971. Note the two main characteristics of the figure:
 
■
The trend increase in the exchange rate. In 1971, a dollar was worth only 0.41 pounds. 
In December 2018, a dollar was worth 0.79 pounds. Put another way, there was an 
appreciation of the dollar relative to the pound over the period.
 
■
The large fluctuations in the exchange rate. In the 1980s, a sharp appreciation, in 
which the dollar more than doubled in value relative to the pound, was followed by 
a nearly equally sharp depreciation. In the 2000s, a large depreciation was followed 
by a large appreciation as the Financial Crisis started, and a smaller depreciation. In 
the 2010s, the exchange rate remained roughly unchanged until the Brexit referen-
dum in June 2016 led to another exchange rate appreciation.
If we are interested, however, in the choice between domestic goods and foreign goods, 
the nominal exchange rate gives us only part of the information we need. Figure 17-3, 
for example, tells us only about movements in the relative price of the two currencies, the 
 dollar and the pound. To US tourists thinking of visiting the United Kingdom, the question 
is not only how many pounds they will get in exchange for their dollars but how much 
goods will cost in the United Kingdom relative to how much they cost in the United States. 
This takes us to our next step—the construction of real exchange rates.
From Nominal to Real Exchange Rates
How can we construct the real exchange rate between the United States and the United 
Kingdom—the price of US goods in terms of British goods?
Warning: There is unfortu-
nately no agreed-upon rule 
among economists or among 
newspapers as to which of the 
two definitions to use. You will 
encounter both. Always check 
which definition is used.
b
E: Nominal exchange rate—
Price of domestic currency 
in terms of foreign currency. 
(From the point of view of the 
United States looking at the 
United Kingdom, the price of 
a dollar in terms of pounds.)
b
Appreciation of the domestic 
currency 3  Increase in 
the price of the domestic 
currency in terms of foreign 
currency 3  Increase in the 
exchange rate.
b
Depreciation of the domestic 
currency 3  Decrease in 
the price of the domestic 
currency in terms of foreign 
currency 3  Decrease in the 
exchange rate.
b
We shall discuss fixed 
exchange rates in Chapter 20.
b


=== PAGE 160 ===
360 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Suppose the United States produced only one good, a Cadillac luxury sedan, and 
the United Kingdom also produced only one good, a Jaguar luxury sedan. (This is one of 
those “suppose” statements that run completely against the facts, but we shall become 
more realistic shortly.) Constructing the real exchange rate, the price of the US goods 
(Cadillacs) in terms of British goods (Jaguars) would be straightforward. We would 
express both goods in terms of the same currency and then compute their relative price.
Suppose, for example, we expressed both goods in terms of pounds.
 
■
The first step would be to take the price of a Cadillac in dollars and convert it to a price 
in pounds. The price of a Cadillac in the United States is, say, $40,000. The dollar is 
worth, say, £0.79, so the price of a Cadillac in pounds is $40,000 * 0.79 = £31,600.
 
■
The second step would be to compute the ratio of the price of the Cadillac in 
pounds to the price of the Jaguar in pounds. The price of a Jaguar in the United 
Kingdom is, say, £30,000. So the price of a Cadillac in terms of Jaguars—that 
is, the real exchange rate between the United States and the United Kingdom—
would be £31,600>£30,000 = 1.05. A Cadillac would be 5% more expensive 
than a Jaguar.
This example is straightforward, but how do we generalize it? The United States and 
the United Kingdom produce more than Cadillacs and Jaguars, and we want to construct 
a real exchange rate that reflects the relative price of all the goods produced in the United 
States in terms of all the goods produced in the United Kingdom.
The computation we just went through tells us how to proceed. Rather than using 
the price of a Jaguar and the price of a Cadillac, we must use a price index for all goods 
produced in the United Kingdom and a price index for all goods produced in the United 
States. This is exactly what the GDP deflators we introduced in Chapter 2 do. They are, by 
definition, price indexes for the set of final goods and services produced in the economy.
Let P be the GDP deflator for the United States, P* be the GDP deflator for the United 
Kingdom (as a rule, we shall denote foreign variables by an asterisk, and E be the dollar-
pound nominal exchange rate. Figure 17-4 goes through the steps needed to construct 
the real exchange rate.
 
■
The price of US goods in dollars is P. Multiplying it by the exchange rate, E—the price 
of dollars in terms of pounds—gives us the price of US goods in pounds, EP.
 
■
The price of British goods in pounds is P*. The real exchange rate, the price of US goods 
in terms of British goods, which we shall call e (the Greek lowercase epsilon), is thus 
given by
Check that if we expressed 
both goods in terms of 
 dollars instead, we would get 
the same result for the real 
exchange rate.
c
e: The real exchange rate is 
the price of domestic goods 
in terms of foreign goods. 
(For example, from the 
point of view of the United 
States looking at the United 
Kingdom, the price of US 
goods in terms of British 
goods.) c
1971 1974 1977 1980 1984 1987 1990 1993 1997 2000 2003 2006 2010 2013 2016
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00
Dollar in Terms of Pounds
Figure 17-3
The Nominal Exchange 
Rate between the Dollar 
and the Pound since 
1971
Although 
the 
dollar 
has 
appreciated relative to the 
pound over the past four 
decades, this appreciation 
has come with large swings 
in the nominal exchange rate 
between the two currencies.
Source: FRED DEXUSUK


=== PAGE 161 ===
 
Chapter 17 
Openness in Goods and Financial Markets 
361
 
e = EP
P* 
(17.1)
The real exchange rate is constructed by multiplying the domestic price level by the 
nominal exchange rate and then dividing by the foreign price level—a straightforward 
extension of the computation we made in our Cadillac/Jaguar example.
Note, however, that there is an important difference between our Cadillac/Jaguar 
example and this more general computation. Unlike the price of Cadillacs in terms of 
Jaguars, the real exchange rate is an index number; that is, its level is arbitrary, and 
therefore uninformative. It is uninformative because the GDP deflators used to construct 
the real exchange rate are themselves index numbers. As we saw in Chapter 2, they are 
equal to 1 (or 100) in whatever year is chosen as the base year.
But all is not lost. Although the level of the real exchange rate is uninformative, the 
rate of change of the real exchange rate is informative. If, for example, the real exchange 
rate between the United States and the United Kingdom increases by 10%, this tells us that 
US goods are now 10% more expensive relative to British goods than they were before.
Like nominal exchange rates, real exchange rates move over time. These changes are 
called real appreciations or real depreciations.
 
■
An increase in the real exchange rate—that is, an increase in the relative price of 
domestic goods in terms of foreign goods—is called a real appreciation.
 
■
A decrease in the real exchange rate—that is, a decrease in the relative price of 
domestic goods in terms of foreign goods—is called a real depreciation.
Figure 17-5 plots the evolution of  the real exchange rate between the United 
States and the United Kingdom since 1971, constructed using equation (17.1). For 
Real appreciation 3  
Increase in the price of the 
domestic goods in terms of 
foreign goods 3  Increase in 
the real exchange rate.
b
Real depreciation 3  
Decrease in the price of the 
domestic goods in terms of 
foreign goods 3  Decrease 
in the real exchange rate.
b
Price of US
goods in 
dollars: P
Price of US
goods in 
pounds: EP
Price of UK
goods in 
pounds: P *
Price of US goods
in terms of UK goods:
5EP/P*
Figure 17-4
The Construction of the 
Real Exchange Rate
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00
1.10
1.20
1971
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
US Goods in Terms of UK Goods
Dollars in Terms of Pounds
Nominal exchange rate
Real exchange rate
Figure 17-5
Real and Nominal 
Exchange Rates between 
the United States and the 
United Kingdom since 
1971
Except for the difference in 
trend reflecting higher average 
inflation in the United Kingdom 
than in the United States until 
the early 1990s, the nominal 
and real exchange rates have 
largely moved together.
Source: FRED. GDPDEF, 
GBRGDPDEFQISMEI, DEXUSUK.


=== PAGE 162 ===
362 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
convenience, it also reproduces the evolution of  the nominal exchange rate from 
Figure 17-3. The GDP deflators have both been set equal to 1 in the year 2000, so 
the nominal exchange rate and the real exchange rate are equal in that year by 
construction.
You should draw two lessons from Figure 17-5.
 
■
The nominal and the real exchange rate can move in opposite directions. Note, for 
example, that, from 1971 to 1976, the nominal exchange rate went up, whereas the 
real exchange rate went down.
How do we reconcile the fact that there was both a nominal appreciation (of the 
dollar relative to the pound) and a real depreciation (of US goods relative to British 
goods) during the period? To see why, return to the definition of the real exchange rate 
in equation (17.1) and rewrite it as:
e = E P
P*
Two things happened in the 1970s:
First, E increased. The dollar went up in terms of pounds—this is the nominal appre-
ciation we saw previously.
Second, P>P* decreased. The price level increased less in the United States than in 
the United Kingdom. Put another way, over the period, average inflation was lower in the 
United States than in the United Kingdom.
The resulting decrease in P>P* was larger than the increase in E, leading to a 
decrease in e, a real depreciation—a decrease in the relative price of domestic goods in 
terms of foreign goods.
To get a better understanding of what happened, let’s go back to our US tourists 
thinking about visiting the United Kingdom, circa 1976. They would find that they could 
buy more pounds per dollar than in 1971 (E had increased). Did this imply their trip 
would be cheaper? No. When they arrived in the United Kingdom, they would discover 
that the prices of goods in the United Kingdom had increased much more than the prices 
of goods in the United States (P* has increased more than P, so P>P* has declined), and 
this more than canceled the increase in the value of the dollar in terms of pounds. They 
would find that their trip was actually more expensive (in terms of US goods) than it 
would have been five years earlier.
There is a general lesson here. Over long periods of time, differences in inflation rates 
across countries can lead to very different movements in nominal exchange rates and 
real exchange rates. We shall return to this issue in Chapter 20.
 
■
The large fluctuations in the nominal exchange rate we saw in Figure 17-3 also 
show up in the real exchange rate.
 
■
This not surprising. Price levels move slowly. So year-to-year movements in the price 
ratio P>P* are typically small compared to the often sharp movements in the nomi-
nal exchange rate E. Thus, from year to year, or even over the course of a few years, 
movements in the real exchange rate e tend to be driven largely by movements in the 
nominal exchange rate E. Note that since the early 1990s, the nominal exchange 
rate and the real exchange rate have moved nearly together. This reflects the fact 
that, since the early 1990s, inflation rates have been similar—and low—in both 
countries.
Can there be a real appre-
ciation with no nominal 
appreciation?
Can there be a nominal 
appreciation with no real 
appreciation? (The answer 
to both questions: yes.) c
If inflation rates were exactly 
equal, P>P* would be 
 constant, and e and E would 
move exactly together. c


=== PAGE 163 ===
 
Chapter 17 
Openness in Goods and Financial Markets 
363
From Bilateral to Multilateral Exchange Rates
We need to take one last step. So far, we have concentrated on the exchange rate between 
the United States and the United Kingdom. But the United Kingdom is just one of many 
countries the United States trades with. Table 17-2 shows the geographic composition of 
US trade for exports and imports.
The main message of the table is that the United States does most of its trading 
with three sets of countries. The first includes its immediate neighbors to the North 
and to the South: Trade with Canada and Mexico accounts for 34% of US exports 
and 26% of US imports. The second includes the European Union, which accounts for 
19% of US exports and 19% of US imports. The third includes the Asian countries—
including Japan and China—which together account for 26% of US exports and 36% 
of US imports.
How do we go from bilateral exchange rates, like the real exchange rate between 
the United States and the United Kingdom, to multilateral exchange rates that reflect 
this composition of trade?
The principle we want to use is simple, even if the details of construction are com-
plicated. We want the weight of a given country to incorporate not only how much the 
country trades with the United States but also how much it competes with the United 
States in other countries. (Why not just look at trade shares between the United States 
and each individual country? Take two countries, the United States and country A. 
Suppose the United States and country A do not trade with each other—so trade shares 
are equal to zero—but they are both exporting to country B. The real exchange rate 
between the United States and country A will matter very much for how much the United 
States exports to country B and thus to the US export performance.) The variable con-
structed in this way is called the multilateral real US exchange rate or the US real 
exchange rate for short.
Figure 17-6 shows the evolution of this multilateral real exchange rate, the price of 
US goods in terms of foreign goods since 1973. Like the bilateral real exchange rates we 
saw a few pages earlier, it is an index number and its level is arbitrary. The index is roughly 
today where it was in 1973. What is most noticeable about the figure are the large swings 
in the multilateral real exchange rate in the 1980s and, to a lesser extent, in the 2000s. 
These swings are so striking that they have been given various names, from the “dollar 
cycle” to the more graphic “dance of the dollar.” In the coming chapters, we shall examine 
where these swings come from and their effects on the trade deficit and economic activity.
Note also the sharp imbal-
ance between US imports 
to China and US exports to 
China, which has been the 
source of tensions between 
China and the Trump admin-
istration. This has led the 
Trump administration to 
introduce tariffs on Chinese 
goods to decrease this bilat-
eral deficit. More on this in 
Chapter 19.
b
Bi means “two.” Multi means 
“many.”
b
These are all equivalent 
names for the relative price 
of US goods in terms of 
 foreign goods: the  multilateral 
real US exchange rate, the 
US  trade-weighted real 
exchange rate, the US 
 effective real exchange rate.
b
The figure begins in 1973 
because the multilateral 
real exchange rate, which is 
constructed by the Federal 
Reserve Board, is available 
only as far back as 1973.
b
Table 17-2 Country Composition of US Exports and Imports, 2018
Source: US Census, International Trade Data, FT900, exhibit 14.
Percent of Exports to
Percent of Imports from
Canada
18
12
Mexico
16
14
European Union
19
19
China
7
21
Japan
4
6
Rest of Asia and Pacific
15
9
Others
21
19


=== PAGE 164 ===
364 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
17-2 OPENNESS IN FINANCIAL MARKETS
Openness in financial markets allows financial investors to hold both domestic assets and 
foreign assets, to diversify their portfolios, to speculate on movements in foreign interest 
rates versus domestic interest rates, on movements in exchange rates, and so on.
Diversify and speculate they do. Given that buying or selling foreign assets implies 
buying or selling foreign currency—sometimes called foreign exchange—the volume 
of transactions in foreign exchange markets gives a sense of the importance of interna-
tional financial transactions. In 2016, for example, the recorded daily volume of foreign 
exchange transactions in the world was $5.1 trillion, of which 88% involved US dollars 
on one side of the transaction and 31% involved the euro.
To get a sense of the magnitude of these numbers, the sum of US exports and 
imports in 2016 totaled about $13 billion per day. Suppose the only dollar transactions 
in foreign exchange markets had been, on one side, by US exporters selling their for-
eign currency earnings, and on the other side by US importers buying the foreign cur-
rency they needed to buy foreign goods. Then the volume of transactions involving dol-
lars in foreign exchange markets would have been $13 billion per day, or about 0.29% 
of the actual daily total volume of dollar transactions ($5.1 * 0.88 = $4.5 trillion) 
involving dollars in foreign exchange markets. This computation tells us that most of 
the transactions are associated not with trade but with purchases and sales of financial 
assets. Moreover, the volume of transactions in foreign exchange markets is not only 
high but also rapidly increasing: it has more than quintupled since 2001. Again, this 
increase in activity reflects mostly an increase in financial transactions rather than an 
increase in trade.
A country’s openness in financial markets has an important implication. It allows 
the country to run trade surpluses and trade deficits. Recall that a country running 
a trade deficit is buying more from the rest of the world than it is selling to the rest of 
the world. To pay for the difference between what it buys and what it sells, the country 
must borrow from the rest of the world. It borrows by making it attractive for foreign 
financial investors to increase their holdings of domestic assets—in effect, to lend to 
the country.
Let’s start by looking more closely at the relation between trade flows and financial 
flows. We shall then look at the determinants of these financial flows.
Daily volume of foreign 
exchange transactions with 
dollars on one side of the 
transaction: $4.5 trillion. 
Daily volume of trade of the 
United States with the rest of 
the world: $13 billion (0.29% 
of the volume of foreign 
exchange transactions).
c
0.80
March 1973 = 1
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
1.25
1.30
1973
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
Figure 17-6
The US Multilateral 
Real Exchange Rate, 
since 1973
Since 1973 there have been 
two large real appreciations 
of the US dollar and two 
large real depreciations.
Source: FRED, TWEXBPA


=== PAGE 165 ===
 
Chapter 17 
Openness in Goods and Financial Markets 
365
The Balance of Payments
A country’s transactions with the rest of the world, including both trade flows and 
financial flows, are summarized by a set of accounts called the balance of payments. 
 Table 17-3 presents the US balance of payments for 2018. The table has two parts, sepa-
rated by a line. Transactions are referred to as either above the line or below the line.
The Current Account
The transactions above the line record payments to and from the rest of the world. They 
are called current account transactions.
 
■
The first two lines record the exports and imports of goods and services. Exports lead 
to payments from the rest of the world, imports to payments to the rest of the world. 
The difference between exports and imports is the trade balance. In 2018, imports 
exceeded exports, leading to a US trade deficit of $622 billion—roughly 3% of US GDP.
 
■
Exports and imports are not the only sources of payments to and from the rest of the 
world. US residents receive income on their holdings of foreign assets, and foreign 
residents receive income on their holdings of US assets. In 2018, income received 
from the rest of the world was $1,200 billion and income paid to foreigners was 
$1,067 billion for a net income balance of $133 billion.
The sum of these net payments to and from the rest of the world is called the 
 current account balance. If net payments from the rest of the world are positive, the 
country is running a current account surplus; if they are negative, the country is 
running a current account deficit. Adding all payments to and from the rest of the 
world, net payments from the United States to the rest of the world were equal in 2018 
to -$622 + $133 = -$489 billion. Put another way, in 2018 the United States ran a 
current account deficit of $489 billion—roughly 2.4% of its GDP.
Can a country have:
A trade deficit and no 
 current account deficit?
A current account deficit and 
no trade deficit?
(The answer to both 
 questions: yes.)
b
Source: US Bureau of Economic Analysis, US International Transactions, Table. 17.1.
Current Account
Exports
2,500
Imports
3,122
 Trade balance 1deficit = minus sign2 112
- 622
Income received
1,200
Income paid
1,067
 Net income (2)
133
Current account balance 112 + 122 (deficit = minus sign)
- 489
Financial Account
Net capital transfers (3)
9
Increase in foreign holdings of US assets (4)
811
Increase in US holdings of foreign assets (5)
301
Financial account balance 172 = 132 + 142 - 152
519
Statistical discrepancy: 
financial account - current account balance
30
Table 17-3 The US Balance of Payments, 2018, in Billions of US Dollars


=== PAGE 166 ===
366 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
The Financial Account
The fact that the United States had a current account deficit of $489 billion in 2018 
implies that it had to borrow $489 billion from the rest of the world—or, equivalently, 
that net foreign holdings of US assets had to increase by $489 billion. The numbers below 
the line show how this was achieved. They are called financial account transactions.
One way a country can finance its deficit is by receiving gifts from other countries. 
An example of such gifts may be a cancellation of some of the country’s debt. This is 
reflected in the line called “net capital transfers.” For a country like the United States, this 
is not an important item, and the number for net capital transfers is close to zero. Nearly 
all the financing comes from an increase in net foreign holdings of US assets.
The increase in foreign holdings of US assets in 2018 was $811 billion. Foreign 
investors—be they private investors, governments, or central banks—bought $811 bil-
lion worth of US stocks, bonds, and other US assets.
At the same time, however, there was an increase in US holdings of foreign assets 
of $301 billion. US investors, private and public, bought $301 billion worth of foreign 
stocks, bonds, and other assets.
The result was an increase in net US foreign indebtedness (the increase in for-
eign holdings of US assets, plus net capital transfers, minus the increase in US 
holdings of foreign assets), also called net capital flows to the United States, of 
$811 + $9 - $301 = $519 billion. Another name for net capital flows is the finan-
cial account balance. Positive net capital flows are called a financial account surplus; 
negative net capital flows are called a financial account deficit. So, put another way, in 
2018 the United States ran a financial account surplus of $519 billion.
Shouldn’t net capital flows (equivalently, the financial account surplus) plus net 
capital transfers be equal to the current account deficit (which was equal to $489 billion 
in 2018)? In principle, yes. In practice, no.
The numbers for current and capital account transactions are constructed using dif-
ferent sources; although they should give the same answers, they typically do not. In 
2018, the difference between the two—called the statistical discrepancy—was $30 
billion, about 6% of the current account balance. This is yet another reminder that, even 
for an advanced country such as the United States, economic data are far from perfect. 
(This problem of measurement manifests itself in another way as well. The sum of the 
current account deficits of all the countries in the world should be equal to zero. One 
country’s deficit should show up as a surplus for the other countries taken as a whole. 
However, this is not the case in the data. If we just add the published current account 
deficits of all the countries in the world, it would appear that the world is running a large 
current account deficit!)
Now that we have looked at the current account, we can return to an issue we 
touched on in Chapter 2, the difference between gross domestic product (GDP), the mea-
sure of output we have used so far, and gross national product (GNP), another mea-
sure of aggregate output.
GDP measures value added domestically. GNP measures the value added by domestic fac-
tors of production. When the economy is closed, the two measures are the same. When the 
economy is open, however, they can differ. Some of the income from domestic production 
goes to foreigners; and domestic residents receive some foreign income. Thus, to go from 
GDP to GNP, one must start from GDP, add income received from the rest of the world, 
and subtract income paid to the rest of the world. Put another way, GNP is equal to GDP 
plus net payments from the rest of the world. More formally, denoting these net income 
payments by NI,
GNP = GDP + NI
Until recently, the financial 
account was called the  capital 
account. It is still called the 
capital account in many 
countries and in the press. 
Technically, in the United 
States today the “capital 
account” refers only to the net 
capital transfers in Table 17-3. 
Yes, it is confusing!
c
In the same way that if you 
spend more than you earn, 
you have to finance the 
difference.
c
A country that runs a  current 
account deficit must finance 
it through positive net capital 
flows. Equivalently, it must 
run a financial account 
surplus.
c
Some economists speculate 
that the explanation lies 
in unrecorded trade with 
Martians. Most others believe 
that mismeasurement is the 
explanation.
c


=== PAGE 167 ===
 
Chapter 17 
Openness in Goods and Financial Markets 
367
In most countries, the difference between the GNP and GDP is small (relative to 
GDP). For example, in the United States, you can see from Table 17-3 that net income 
payments were equal to $133 billion. GNP exceeded GDP by $133 billion, or about 0.6% 
of GDP. For some countries, however, the difference can be large. This is explored in the 
Focus Box “GDP versus GNP: The Example of Kuwait.”
The Choice between Domestic and Foreign Assets
Openness in financial markets implies that people (or financial institutions that act on 
their behalf) face a new financial decision: whether to hold domestic assets or foreign 
assets.
It would appear that we actually have to think about at least two new decisions: 
the choice of holding domestic money versus foreign money and that of holding domes-
tic interest-paying assets versus foreign interest-paying assets. But remember why people 
hold money: to engage in transactions. For someone who lives in the United States and 
whose transactions are mostly or fully in dollars, there is little point in holding foreign 
currency. Foreign currency cannot be used for transactions in the United States, and if 
the goal is to hold foreign assets, holding foreign currency is clearly less desirable than 
holding foreign bonds, which pay interest. This leaves us with only one new decision: the 
choice between domestic and foreign interest-paying assets.
For now, let’s think of these assets as domestic and foreign one-year bonds. Consider, 
for example, the choice between US and UK one-year bonds from the point of view of a 
US investor.
 
■
Suppose you decide to hold US bonds.
 
■
Let it be the one-year US nominal interest rate. Then, as Figure 17-7 shows for every 
dollar you put in US bonds, you will get 11 + it2 dollars next year. (This is repre-
sented by the arrow pointing to the right at the top of the figure.)
 
■
Suppose you decide instead to hold UK bonds.
 
■
To buy UK bonds, you must first buy pounds. Let Et be the nominal exchange rate 
between the dollar and the pound. For every dollar, you get Et pounds. (This is repre-
sented by the arrow pointing downward in the figure.)
Let i*
t denote the one-year nominal interest rate on UK bonds (in pounds). When next 
year comes, you will have Et11 + i*t2 pounds. (This is represented by the arrow pointing 
to the right at the bottom of the figure.)
You will then have to convert your pounds back into dollars. If you expect the nomi-
nal exchange rate next year to be Ee
t + 1, each pound will be worth 11>Ee
t + 12 dollars. So 
you can expect to have Et11 + i*t211>Ee
t + 12 dollars next year for every dollar you invest 
now. (This is represented by the arrow pointing upward in the figure.)
We shall look at the expression we just derived in more detail soon. But note its basic 
implication already. In assessing the attractiveness of UK versus US bonds, you cannot 
look just at the UK interest rate and the US interest rate; you must also assess what you 
think will happen to the dollar/pound exchange rate between this year and next.
Two qualifications, from 
Chapter 4:
• Foreigners involved in 
 illegal activities often hold 
 dollars because dollars 
can be exchanged easily 
and cannot be traced.
• In times of high  inflation, 
people sometimes switch 
to a foreign  currency—in 
other countries, often 
the dollar—for use 
even in some domestic 
transactions.
b
*
Year t
$1
$1
US bonds
UK bonds
£Et
Year t 1 1
$(1 1 i t )
£Et (1 1 i t )
$Et (1 1 i t ) (1/Ee    )
t 11
*
Figure 17-7
Expected Returns from 
Holding One-Year US 
Bonds versus One-Year 
UK Bonds


=== PAGE 168 ===
368 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
GDP versus GNP: The Example of Kuwait
When oil was discovered in Kuwait, Kuwait’s government 
decided that a portion of oil revenues would be saved and 
invested abroad rather than spent, to provide future Kuwaiti 
generations with income when oil revenues came to an end. 
Kuwait ran a large current account surplus, steadily accu-
mulating large foreign assets. As a result, it had large hold-
ings of foreign assets and received substantial income from 
the rest of the world. Table 1 gives GDP, GNP, and net invest-
ment income for Kuwait from 1989 to 1994 (you will see the 
reason for the choice of dates).
Note how much larger GNP was compared to GDP 
throughout the period. Net income from abroad was 34% 
of  GDP in 1989. But note also how net factor payments 
steadily decreased after 1989. This is because Kuwait had 
to pay its allies for part of  the cost of  the 1990–1991 Gulf 
War and also had to pay for reconstruction after the war. 
It did so by running a current account deficit—that is, by 
decreasing its net holdings of  foreign assets. This in turn 
led to a decrease in the income it earned from foreign assets 
and, by implication, a decrease in its net factor payments.
Since the Gulf War, Kuwait has rebuilt a sizable net for-
eign asset position. Net income from abroad was 6% of GDP 
in 2018.
FOCUS
Year
GDP
GNP
Net Income (NI)
1989
7,143
9,616
2,473
1990
5,328
7,560
2,232
1991
3,131
4,669
1,538
1992
5,826
7,364
1,538
1993
7,231
8,386
1,155
1994
7,380
8,321
941
Table 1  GDP, GNP, and Net Income in  
Kuwait, 1989–1994
Let’s now make the same assumption we made in Chapter 14 when first discussing 
the choice between short- and long-term bonds. Let’s assume that you and other finan-
cial investors care only about the expected rate of return, ignoring differences in risk, and 
therefore want to hold only the asset with the highest expected rate of return. In this 
case, if both UK and US bonds are to be held, they must have the same expected rate of 
return. Arbitrage implies that the following relation must hold:
11 + it2 = 1Et211 + i*t2a
1
Ee
t + 1
b
Reorganizing,
 
11 + it2 = 11 + i*t2a Et
Ee
t + 1
b 
(17.2)
Equation (17.2) is called the uncovered interest parity relation or simply the 
interest parity condition.
The assumption that financial investors will hold only the bonds with the highest 
expected rate of return is obviously too strong, for two reasons:
 
■
It ignores transaction costs. Buying and selling UK bonds requires three separate 
transactions, each with a transaction cost.
 
■
It ignores risk. The exchange rate a year from now is uncertain. For the US investor, 
holding UK bonds is therefore more risky, in terms of dollars, than holding US bonds.
But as a characterization of capital movements among the major world financial 
markets (New York, Frankfurt, London, and Tokyo), the assumption is not far off. Small 
changes in interest rates and rumors of impending appreciation or depreciation can 
lead to movements of billions of dollars within minutes. For the rich countries of the 
world, the arbitrage assumption in equation (17.2) is a good approximation of reality. 
Other countries whose capital markets are smaller and less developed, or countries that 
The word uncovered is to 
distinguish this relation 
from another relation called 
the covered interest parity 
condition, which is derived 
by looking at the following 
choice: Buy and hold US 
bonds for one year; or buy 
pounds today, buy one-year 
UK bonds with the proceeds, 
and agree to sell the pounds 
for dollars a year ahead at a 
predetermined price, called 
the forward exchange rate. 
The rate of return on these 
two alternatives, which can 
both be realized at no risk 
today, must be the same. 
The covered interest parity 
condition is a riskless arbi-
trage condition. It typically 
holds tightly.
c
Whether holding UK bonds 
or US bonds is more risky 
depends on which investors 
we are looking at. Holding 
UK bonds is riskier from the 
point of view of US investors. 
Holding US bonds is riskier 
from the point of view of 
British investors. (Why?)
c
Source: International Financial Statistics, IMF. All numbers are in 
millions of Kuwaiti dinars. 1 dinar = $3.0. (2018).


=== PAGE 169 ===
have various forms of capital controls, have more leeway in choosing their domestic 
interest rate than is implied by equation (17.2). We shall return to this issue at the end 
of Chapter 20.
Interest Rates and Exchange Rates
Let’s get a better sense of what the interest parity condition implies. First rewrite Et>Ee
t + 1 
as 1>11 + 1Ee
t + 1 - Et2>Et2. Replacing in equation (17.2) gives
 
11 + it2 =
11 + i*t2
31 + 1Ee
t + 1 - Et2>Et4 
(17.3)
This gives us a relation between the domestic nominal interest rate, it, the foreign 
nominal interest rate, i*t, and the expected rate of appreciation of the domestic currency, 
1Ee
t + 1 - Et2>Et. As long as interest rates or the expected rate of depreciation are not too 
large—say, below 20% a year—a good approximation to this equation is given by:
 
it ≈i*t - Ee
t + 1 - Et
Et
 
(17.4)
This is the form of the interest parity condition you must remember. Arbitrage by 
investors implies that the domestic interest rate must be equal to the foreign interest rate minus 
the expected appreciation rate of the domestic currency.
Note that the expected appreciation rate of the domestic currency is also the expected 
depreciation rate of the foreign currency. So equation (17.4) can be equivalently stated 
as saying that the domestic interest rate must be equal to the foreign interest rate minus the 
expected depreciation rate of the foreign currency.
Let’s apply this equation to US bonds versus UK bonds. Suppose the one-year nomi-
nal interest rate is 2.0% in the United States and 5.0% in the United Kingdom. Should 
you hold UK bonds or US bonds?
 
■
It depends whether you expect the pound to depreciate relative to the dollar over the 
coming year by more or less than the difference between the US interest rate and the 
UK interest rate, or 3.0% in this case 15.0% - 2.0%2.
 
■
If you expect the pound to depreciate by more than 3.0%, then, despite the fact that 
the interest rate is higher in the United Kingdom than in the United States, investing 
in UK bonds is less attractive than investing in US bonds. By holding UK bonds, you 
will get higher interest payments next year, but the pound will be worth less in terms 
of dollars, making it less attractive to invest in UK bonds than in US bonds.
 
■
If you expect the pound to depreciate by less than 3.0% or even to appreciate, then 
the reverse holds, and UK bonds are more attractive than US bonds.
Looking at it another way: If the uncovered interest parity condition holds and the 
US one-year interest rate is 3% lower than the UK interest rate, it must be that financial 
investors are expecting, on average, an appreciation of the dollar relative to the pound 
over the coming year of about 3% and this is why they are willing to hold US bonds 
despite their lower interest rate. (Another—and more striking—example is provided in 
the Focus Box “Buying Brazilian Bonds.”)
The arbitrage relation between interest rates and exchange rates, in the form of 
either equation (17.2) or equation (17.4), will play a central role in the following chap-
ters. It suggests that, unless countries are willing to tolerate large movements in their 
exchange rate, domestic and foreign interest rates are likely to move largely together.
This follows from  
Proposition 3 in Appendix 2 
at the end of the book.
b
If the dollar is expected to 
appreciate by 3% relative to 
the pound, then the pound 
is expected to depreciate by 
3% relative to the dollar.
b
 
Chapter 17 
Openness in Goods and Financial Markets 
369


=== PAGE 170 ===
370 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Buying Brazilian Bonds
Put yourself back in September 1993 (the very high interest 
rate in Brazil at the time helps make the point I want to get 
across here). Brazilian bonds are paying a monthly interest 
rate of 36.9%! This seems attractive compared to the annual 
rate of 3% on US bonds—corresponding to a monthly inter-
est rate of about 0.2%. Shouldn’t you buy Brazilian bonds?
The discussion in this chapter tells you that to decide you 
need one more crucial element, the expected rate of depre-
ciation of the cruzeiro (the name of the Brazilian currency 
at the time; the currency is now called the real) in terms of 
dollars.
You need this information because, as we saw in equa-
tion (17.4), the return in dollars from investing in Brazilian 
bonds for a month is equal to one plus the Brazilian interest 
rate, divided by one plus the expected rate of depreciation of 
the cruzeiro relative to the dollar:
1 + i*
t
31 + 1E e
t + 1 - Et2>Et4
What rate of depreciation of the cruzeiro should you 
expect over the coming month? A reasonable first pass is to 
expect the rate of depreciation during the coming month to 
be equal to the rate of depreciation last month. The dollar 
was worth 100,000 cruzeiros at the end of July 1993 and 
worth 134,600 cruzeiros at the end of August 1993, so the 
rate of appreciation of the dollar relative to the cruzeiro—
equivalently, the rate of depreciation of the cruzeiro rela-
tive to the dollar—in August was 34.6%. If depreciation is 
expected to continue at the same rate in September as it did 
in August, the expected return from investing in Brazilian 
bonds for one month is
1.369
1.346 = 1.017
The expected rate of return in dollars from holding 
Brazilian bonds is only 11.017 - 12 = 1.7% per month, 
not the 36.9% per month that initially looked so attractive. 
Note that 1.7% per month is still higher than the monthly 
interest rate on US bonds (about 0.2%). But think of the risk 
and the transaction costs—all the elements we ignored when 
we wrote the arbitrage condition. When these are taken into 
account, you may well decide not to buy the Brazilian bonds.
FOCUS
Take the extreme case of two countries that commit to maintaining their bilateral 
exchange rates at a fixed value. If markets have faith in this commitment, they will 
expect the exchange rate to remain constant and the expected depreciation will be equal 
to zero. In this case, the arbitrage condition implies that interest rates in the two coun-
tries will have to move exactly together. Most of the time, as we shall see, governments do 
not make such absolute commitments to maintain the exchange rate, but they often do 
try to avoid large movements in the exchange rate. This puts sharp limits on how much 
they can allow their interest rate to deviate from interest rates elsewhere in the world.
How much do nominal interest rates actually move together in major countries? 
Figure 17-8 plots the three-month nominal interest rate in the United States and United 
Kingdom (expressed at annual rates) since 1970. The figure shows that the movements 
If Ee
t + 1 = Et, then the 
interest parity condition 
implies it = i*t.
c
0.00
Nominal interest rate (percent) 
2.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
10.00
12.00
14.00
16.00
18.00
1970-02
1972-04
1974-06
1976-08
1978-10
1980-12
1983-02
1985-04
1987-06
1989-08
1991-10
1993-12
1996-02
1998-04
2000-06
2002-08
2004-10
2006-12
2009-02
2011-04
2013-06
2015-08
2017-10
US 3-month rate
UK 3-month rate
Figure 17-8
Three-Month Nominal 
Interest Rates in the 
United States and United 
Kingdom since 1970
US and UK nominal inter-
est rates have largely moved 
together over the last 40 years.
Source: FRED TB3MS; 
IR3TTS01GBM156N


=== PAGE 171 ===
are related but not identical. Interest rates were high in both countries in the early 1980s, 
and high again—although much more so in the United Kingdom than in the United 
States—in the late 1980s. They have been low in both countries since the mid-1990s, 
and are both very low and close to each other today. (Note how close to the zero lower 
bound the rate has been in both countries since mid-2009.) At the same time, differences 
between the two have sometimes been quite large. In 1990, for example, the UK interest 
rate was nearly 7% higher than the US interest rate. In the coming chapters, we shall 
return to why such differences emerge and what their implications may be.
17-3 CONCLUSIONS AND A LOOK AHEAD
We have now set the stage for the study of the open economy:
 
■
Openness in goods markets allows people and firms to choose between domestic 
goods and foreign goods. This choice depends primarily on the real exchange rate—the 
relative price of domestic goods in terms of foreign goods.
 
■
Openness in financial markets allows investors to choose between domestic assets 
and foreign assets. This choice depends primarily on their relative rates of return, 
which depend on domestic and foreign interest rates and on the expected rate of 
appreciation of the domestic currency.
In Chapter 18 we look at the implications of openness in goods markets. In 
Chapter 19, we explore the implications of openness in both goods and financial mar-
kets. In Chapter 20, we discuss the pros and cons of different exchange rate regimes.
Meanwhile, do the follow-
ing: Look at the back pages 
of a recent issue of The 
Economist for short-term 
interest rates in different 
countries relative to the 
United States. Assume that 
uncovered interest parity 
holds. Which currencies 
are expected to appreciate 
against the dollar?
b
SUMMARY
 
■Openness in goods markets allows people and firms to 
choose between domestic and foreign goods. Openness in 
financial markets allows financial investors to hold domes-
tic or foreign financial assets.
 
■The nominal exchange rate is the price of the domestic cur-
rency in terms of foreign currency. From the viewpoint of 
the United States, the nominal exchange rate between the 
United States and the United Kingdom is the price of a dollar 
in terms of pounds.
 
■A nominal appreciation (an appreciation, for short) is an 
increase in the price of the domestic currency in terms 
of foreign currency. In other words, it corresponds to an 
increase in the exchange rate. A nominal depreciation 
(a depreciation, for short) is a decrease in the price of the 
domestic currency in terms of foreign currency. It corre-
sponds to a decrease in the exchange rate.
 
■The real exchange rate is the relative price of domestic 
goods in terms of foreign goods. It is equal to the nominal 
exchange rate times the domestic price level divided by the 
foreign price level.
 
■A real appreciation is an increase in the relative price of 
domestic goods in terms of foreign goods (i.e., an increase in 
the real exchange rate). It may come either from a nominal 
appreciation or from domestic inflation being higher than 
foreign inflation. A real depreciation is a decrease in the rel-
ative price of domestic goods in terms of foreign goods (i.e., 
a decrease in the real exchange rate). It may come either 
from a nominal depreciation or from domestic inflation 
being lower than foreign inflation.
 
■The multilateral real exchange rate, or real exchange rate 
for short, is a weighted average of bilateral real exchange 
rates.
 
■The balance of payments records a country’s transactions 
with the rest of the world. The current account balance is 
equal to the sum of the trade balance and net income the 
country receives from the rest of the world. The financial 
account balance is equal to net capital transfers plus capital 
flows from the rest of the world minus capital flows to the 
rest of the world.
 
■The current account and the financial account are mirror 
images of each other. Leaving aside statistical problems, 
the current account plus the financial account must sum 
to zero. A current account deficit is financed by net capital 
flows from the rest of the world, thus by a capital account 
 
Chapter 17 
Openness in Goods and Financial Markets 
371


=== PAGE 172 ===
372 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
surplus. Similarly, a current account surplus corresponds 
to a capital account deficit.
 
■Uncovered interest parity, or interest parity for short, is 
an arbitrage condition stating that the expected rates of 
return in terms of domestic currency on domestic and 
foreign bonds must be equal. Interest parity implies that 
the domestic interest rate approximately equals the foreign 
interest rate minus the expected nominal appreciation rate 
of the domestic currency.
KEY TERMS
openness in goods markets, 355
tariffs, 355
quotas, 355
openness in financial markets, 355
capital controls, 355
openness in factor markets, 355
North American Free Trade  
Agreement (NAFTA), 355
tradable goods, 357
real exchange rate, 358
nominal exchange rate, 359
appreciation (nominal), 359
depreciation (nominal), 359
fixed exchange rates, 359
revaluation, 359
devaluation, 359
real appreciation, 361
real depreciation, 361
bilateral exchange rate, 363
multilateral exchange rate, 363
multilateral real US exchange rate, 363
trade-weighted real exchange rate, 363
effective real exchange rate, 363
foreign exchange, 364
balance of payments, 365
above the line, 365
below the line, 365
current account, 365
income balance, 365
current account balance, 365
current account surplus, 365
current account deficit, 365
financial account, 366
capital account, 366
net capital flows, 366
financial account balance, 366
financial account surplus, 366
financial account deficit, 366
statistical discrepancy, 366
gross national product (GNP), 366
uncovered interest parity relation, 368
interest parity condition, 368
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using the information in this chapter, label each of the following 
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. If there are no statistical discrepancies, countries with 
current account deficits must receive net capital inflows.
b. Although the export ratio can be larger than one—as it 
is in Singapore—the same cannot be true of the ratio of 
imports to GDP.
c. The fact that a rich country like Japan has such a small 
ratio of imports to GDP is clear evidence of an unfair play-
ing field for US exporters to Japan.
d. Uncovered interest parity implies that interest rates must 
be the same across countries.
e. The nominal exchange rate in this chapter is defined as 
the domestic currency price of a unit of foreign currency.
f. The nominal exchange rate and the real exchange rate 
always move in the same direction.
g. The nominal exchange rate and the real exchange rate 
usually move in the same direction.
h. If the dollar is expected to appreciate against the yen, 
uncovered interest parity implies that the US nominal 
interest rate must be greater than the Japanese nominal 
interest rate.
i. Given the definition of the exchange rate adopted in 
this chapter, if the dollar is the domestic currency and 
the euro the foreign currency, a nominal exchange rate 
of 0.75 means that 0.75 dollars is worth one euro.
j. A real appreciation means that domestic goods become 
less expensive relative to foreign goods.
2. Consider two fictional economies, one called the domestic coun-
try and the other the foreign country. Given the transactions listed 
in (a) through (g), construct the balance of payments for each 
country. If necessary, include a statistical discrepancy.
a. The domestic country purchased $100 in oil from the for-
eign country.
b. Foreign tourists spent $25 on domestic ski slopes.
c. Foreign investors were paid $15 in dividends from their 
holdings of domestic equities.
d. Domestic residents gave $25 to foreign charities.
e. Domestic businesses borrowed $65 from foreign banks.
f. Foreign investors purchased $15 of domestic government 
bonds.


=== PAGE 173 ===
g. Domestic investors sold $50 of their holdings of foreign 
government bonds.
3. Consider two bonds, one issued in euros (€) in Germany, and 
one issued in dollars ($) in the United States. Assume that both 
government securities are one-year bonds—paying the face value 
of  the bond one year from now. The exchange rate, E, stands  
at 0.75 euros per dollar.
The face values and prices on the two bonds are given by
Face Value
Price
United States
$10,000
$9,615.38
Germany
€10,000
€9,433.96
a. Compute the nominal interest rate on each of the bonds.
b. Compute the expected exchange rate next year consistent 
with uncovered interest parity.
c. If you expect the dollar to depreciate relative to the euro, 
which bond should you buy?
d. Assume that you are a US investor and you exchange dol-
lars for euros and purchase the German bond today. One 
year from now, it turns out that the exchange rate, E, is 
actually 0.72 (0.72 euros buys one dollar). What is your 
realized rate of return in dollars compared to the realized 
rate of return you would have made had you held the US 
bond?
e. Are the differences in rates of return in part d consistent 
with the uncovered interest parity condition? Why or 
why not?
DIG DEEPER
4. Consider a world with three equal-sized economies (A, B,  
and C) and three goods (clothes, cars, and computers). Assume 
that consumers in all three economies want to spend an equal 
amount on all three goods.
The value of production of each good in the three economies is 
given in the table below.
A
B
C
Clothes
10
 0
 5
Cars
 5
10
 0
Computers
 0
 5
10
a. What is GDP in each economy? If the total value of GDP 
is consumed and no country borrows from abroad, how 
much will consumers in each economy spend on each of 
the goods?
b. If no country borrows from abroad, what will be the trade 
balance in each country? What will be the pattern of trade 
in this world (i.e., which good will each country export 
and to whom)?
c. Given your answer to part b, will country A have a zero 
trade balance with country B? with country C? Will any 
country have a zero trade balance with any other country?
d. The United States has a large trade deficit. It has a trade 
deficit with each of its major trading partners, but the def-
icit is much larger with some countries (e.g., China) than 
with others. Suppose the United States eliminates its over-
all trade deficit (with the world as a whole). Do you expect 
it to have a zero trade balance with every one of its trading 
partners? Does the especially large trade deficit with China 
necessarily indicate that China does not allow US goods to 
compete on an equal basis with Chinese goods?
5. The exchange rate and the labor market
Suppose the domestic currency depreciates (i.e., E falls). 
Assume that P and P* remain constant.
a. How does the nominal depreciation affect the relative 
price of domestic goods (i.e., the real exchange rate)? 
Given your answer, what effect would a nominal deprecia-
tion likely have on (world) demand for domestic goods? on 
the domestic unemployment rate?
b. Given the foreign price level, P*, what is the price of for-
eign goods in terms of domestic currency? How does a 
nominal depreciation affect the price of foreign goods 
in terms of domestic currency? How does a nominal 
depreciation affect the domestic consumer price index? 
(Hint: Remember that domestic consumers buy foreign 
goods (imports) as well as domestic goods.)
c. If the nominal wage remains constant, how does a nomi-
nal depreciation affect the real wage?
d. Comment on the following statement. “A depreciating 
currency puts domestic labor on sale.”
EXPLORE FURTHER
6. Retrieve the nominal exchange rates between Japan and the 
United States from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis FRED 
data site. It is series AEXJPUS. This exchange rate is written as 
yen per dollar.
a. In the terminology of the chapter, when the exchange rate 
is written as yen per dollar, which country is being treated 
as the domestic country?
b. Plot the number of yen per dollar since 1971. During 
which time period(s) did the yen appreciate? During which 
period(s) did the yen depreciate?
c. Given the long-running Japanese slump, one way of 
increasing demand would be to make Japanese goods 
more attractive. Does this require an appreciation or a 
depreciation of the yen?
d. What has happened to the yen during the past few years? 
Has it appreciated or depreciated? Is this good or bad for 
Japan?
7. Retrieve the most recent World Economic Outlook (WEO) 
from the Web site of the International Monetary Fund (www.imf.
org). In the Statistical Appendix, find the table titled “Balances on 
Current Account,” which lists current account balances around the 
world. Use the data for the most recent year available to answer 
parts a through c.
 
Chapter 17 
Openness in Goods and Financial Markets 
373


=== PAGE 174 ===
374 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
a. Note the sum of current account balances around the 
world. As noted in the chapter, the sum of current account 
balances should equal zero. What does this sum actually 
equal? Why does this sum indicate some mismeasurement 
(i.e., if the sum were correct, what would it imply)?
b. Which regions of the world are borrowing and which are 
lending?
c. Compare the US current account balance to the current 
account balances of the other advanced economies. Do 
other advanced economies lend enough to cover the entire 
US current account balance?
d. The statistical tables in the WEO typically project data into 
the future. Look at the projected data on current account 
balances. Do your answers to parts b and c seem likely to 
change in the near future?
8. Saving and investment throughout the world
Retrieve the most recent World Economic Outlook (WEO) 
from the Web site of the International Monetary Fund (www.imf.
org). In the Statistical Appendix, find the table titled “Summary of 
Net Lending and Borrowing,” which lists saving and investment 
(as a percentage of GDP) around the world. Use the data for the 
most recent year available to answer parts a and b.
a. Does world saving equal investment? (You may ignore 
small statistical discrepancies.) Offer some intuition for 
your answer.
b. How does US saving compare to US investment? How 
is the United States able to finance its investment? (We 
explain this explicitly in the next chapter, but your intuition 
should help you figure it out now.)
c. From the FRED economic database download real GDP 
(variable GDPC1) and real GNP (variable GNPC96) for 
the years 1947 to the latest data. Calculate the percent-
age difference between GNP and GDP in the United States. 
Which is larger? Why is that the case?
FURTHER READINGS
 
■If you want to learn more about international trade 
and international economics, a very good textbook is 
Paul Krugman, Marc Melitz, and Maurice Obstfeld’s 
International Economics, Theory and Policy, 10th ed. 
(Prentice Hall, 2014).
 
■If you want to know current exchange rates between 
nearly any pair of currencies in the world, look at the 
“currency converter” on www.oanda.com/currency/
converter/.


=== PAGE 175 ===
375
The Goods 
Market in an Open 
Economy
I
n 2009, countries around the world worried about the risk of a recession in the 
United States, but their worries were not so much for the United States as they were 
for  themselves. To them, a US recession meant lower exports to the United States, a 
 deterioration of their trade position, and weaker growth at home.
Were their worries justified? Figure 17-1 from the previous chapter certainly suggested 
they were. The US recession clearly led to a world recession. To understand what happened, 
we must expand the treatment of the goods market in Chapter 3 and account for openness 
in the analysis of goods markets. This is what we do in this chapter.
Section 18-1 characterizes equilibrium in the goods market for an open economy.
Sections 18-2 and 18-3 show the effects of domestic shocks and foreign shocks on the 
domestic economy’s output and trade balance.
Section 18-4 looks at the effect of a real depreciation on output and the trade balance.
Section 18-5 gives an alternative description of the equilibrium that shows the close 
 connection among saving, investment, and the trade balance. (It is a really important 
 section. You will think differently about open economy issues after you have read it.)
18
If you remember one basic message from this chapter, it should be: Output depends 
on both domestic and foreign demand. 


=== PAGE 176 ===
376 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
18-1  THE IS RELATION IN THE OPEN 
ECONOMY
When we were assuming the economy was closed to trade, there was no need to distin-
guish between the domestic demand for goods and the demand for domestic goods; they were 
the same thing. Now we must distinguish between the two. Some domestic demand falls 
on foreign goods, and some of the demand for domestic goods comes from foreigners. 
Let’s look at this distinction more closely.
The Demand for Domestic Goods
In an open economy, the demand for domestic goods, Z, is given by
 
Z = C + I + G - IM>e + X 
(18.1)
The first three terms—consumption, C, investment, I, and government spending, G—
constitute the total domestic demand for goods, domestic or foreign. If the economy 
were closed, C + I + G would also be the demand for domestic goods. This is why, until 
now, we have only looked at C + I + G. But now we have to make two adjustments:
 
■
First, we must subtract imports—the part of domestic demand that falls on foreign 
goods rather than on domestic goods.
We must be careful here. Foreign goods are different from domestic goods, so 
we cannot just subtract the quantity of imports, IM. If we were to do so, we would 
be subtracting apples (foreign goods) from oranges (domestic goods). We must 
first express the value of imports in terms of domestic goods. This is what IM>e in 
 equation (18.1) stands for. Recall from Chapter 17 that e, the real exchange rate, is 
defined as the price of domestic goods in terms of foreign goods. Equivalently, 1>e is 
the price of foreign goods in terms of domestic goods. So IM 11>e2—or, equivalently, 
IM>e—is the value of imports in terms of domestic goods.
 
■
Second, we must add exports—the part of demand for domestic goods that comes 
from abroad. This is captured by the term X in equation (18.1).
The Determinants of C, I, and G
Having listed the five components of demand, the next task is to specify their determi-
nants. Let’s start with the first three: C, I, and G. Now that we are assuming the economy 
is open, how should we modify our earlier descriptions of consumption, investment, and 
government spending? The answer: not very much, if at all. How much consumers decide 
to spend still depends on their income and their wealth. Although the real exchange rate 
surely affects the composition of consumption spending between domestic and foreign 
goods, there is no obvious reason why it should affect the overall level of consumption. 
The same is true of investment; the real exchange rate may affect whether firms buy 
domestic machines or foreign machines, but it should not affect total investment.
This is good news because it implies that we can use the descriptions of consumption, 
investment, and government spending that we developed earlier. Therefore, I assume that 
domestic demand is given by:
Domestic demand: C + I + G = C1Y - T2 + I1Y, r2 + G
1+2   1+,-2
Consumption depends positively on disposable income, Y - T, and investment 
depends positively on production, Y, and negatively on the real policy rate, r. Note that 
I leave aside some of the refinements I introduced earlier (i.e., the presence of a risk 
“The domestic demand for 
goods” and “the demand 
for domestic goods” 
sound similar but are not 
the same thing. Part of 
domestic demand falls on 
foreign goods. Part of  foreign 
demand falls on domestic 
goods.
c
In Chapter 3, I ignored the real 
exchange rate and subtracted 
IM, not IM>e. But I was cheat-
ing; I did not want to have to 
talk about the real exchange 
rate—and complicate 
 matters—so early in the book.
c
Domestic demand for goods 
C + I + G
-  Domestic demand for for-
eign goods (imports), IM>e
+  Foreign demand for domes-
tic goods (exports), X
=  Demand for 
domestic goods 
C + I + G - IM>e + X
c


=== PAGE 177 ===
 
Chapter 18 
The Goods Market in an Open Economy 
377
premium, which we focused on in Chapters 6 and 14, and the role of expectations, which 
we focused on in Chapters 14 to 16). I want to take things one step at a time to understand 
the effects of opening the economy; I shall reintroduce some of those refinements later.
The Determinants of Imports
Imports are the part of domestic demand that falls on foreign goods. What do they depend 
on? They clearly depend on domestic income. Higher domestic income leads to a higher 
domestic demand for all goods, both domestic and foreign. So a higher domestic income 
leads to higher imports. They also clearly depend on the real exchange rate—the price of 
domestic goods in terms of foreign goods. The more expensive domestic goods are rela-
tive to foreign goods—or, equivalently, the cheaper foreign goods are relative to domestic 
goods—the higher is the domestic demand for foreign goods. So a higher real exchange 
rate leads to higher imports. Thus, we write imports as:
 
IM = IM1Y, e2 
(18.2)
1+, +2
 
■
An increase in domestic income, Y (equivalently, an increase in domestic output—
income and output are still equal in an open economy), leads to an increase in 
imports. This positive effect of income on imports is captured by the positive sign 
under Y in equation (18.2).
 
■
An increase in the real exchange rate, e (a real appreciation), leads to an increase in 
imports, IM. This positive effect of the real exchange rate on imports is captured by 
the positive sign under e in equation (18.2). (As e goes up, IM goes up but 1>e goes 
down, so what happens to IM>e, the value of imports in terms of domestic goods, is 
ambiguous. I return to this point below.)
The Determinants of Exports
Exports are the part of foreign demand that falls on domestic goods. What do they 
depend on? They depend on foreign income: Higher foreign income means higher foreign 
demand for all goods, foreign and domestic, and so leads to higher US exports. Exports 
also depend on the real exchange rate. The higher the price of domestic goods in terms 
of foreign goods, the lower the foreign demand for domestic goods. In other words, the 
higher the real exchange rate, the lower are exports.
Let Y* denote foreign income (equivalently, foreign output). We therefore write 
exports as
 
X = X1Y *, e2 
(18.3)
1+, -2
 
■
An increase in foreign income, Y*, leads to an increase in exports.
 
■
An increase in the real exchange rate, e, leads to a decrease in exports.
Putting the Components Together
Figure 18-1 puts together what we have learned so far. It plots the various components 
of demand against output, keeping constant all other variables (the interest rate, taxes, 
government spending, foreign output, and the real exchange rate) that affect demand.
In Figure 18-1(a), the line DD plots domestic demand, C + I + G, as a function 
of output, Y. This relation between demand and output is familiar from Chapter 3. 
Under our standard assumptions, the slope of the relation between demand and out-
put is positive but less than one. An increase in output—equivalently, an increase in 
I again cheat a bit here. 
Income should include not 
only domestic income but 
also net income and transfers 
from abroad. For simplicity, 
I ignore these two additional 
terms here.
b
Recall the discussion at 
the start of this chapter. 
Countries in the rest of the 
world worry about a US 
recession because it means a 
decrease in the US demand 
for foreign goods.
b
Recall that asterisks refer to 
foreign variables.
b


=== PAGE 178 ===
378 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Figure 18-1
The Demand for 
Domestic Goods and Net 
Exports
(a) The domestic demand for 
goods is an increasing func-
tion of income (output).
(b) and (c) The demand for 
domestic goods is obtained by 
subtracting the value of imports 
from domestic demand and 
then adding exports.
(d) The trade balance is a 
decreasing function of output.
Demand, Z
DD
Domestic demand
(C 1 I 1 G)
Output, Y
(a)
Demand, Z
DD
AA
Imports (IM/E)
Output, Y
(b)
Demand, Z
DD
AA
ZZ
Exports (X )
A
B
C
Output, Y
(c)
Y
Net exports, NX
NX
Trade deﬁcit
Trade surplus
BC
(d)
YTB
YTB
income—increases demand but less than one-for-one. (In the absence of good reasons to 
the contrary, we draw the relation between demand and output, and the other relations 
in this chapter, as lines rather than curves. This is purely for convenience, and none of 
the discussions that follow depend on this assumption.)
To arrive at the demand for domestic goods, we must first subtract imports. This 
is done in Figure 18-1(b) and it gives us the line AA, which represents the domestic 
demand for domestic goods. The distance between DD and AA equals the value of 


=== PAGE 179 ===
 
Chapter 18 
The Goods Market in an Open Economy 
379
imports, IM>e. Because the quantity of imports increases with income, the distance 
between the two lines increases with income. We can establish two facts about line AA, 
which will be useful later in the chapter:
 
■
AA is flatter than DD. As income increases, some of the additional domestic demand falls 
on foreign goods rather than on domestic goods. In other words, as income increases, 
the domestic demand for domestic goods increases less than total domestic demand.
 
■
As long as some of the additional demand falls on domestic goods, AA has a positive 
slope: An increase in income leads to some increase in the demand for domestic goods.
Finally, we must add exports. This is done in Figure 18-1(c) and gives us the line ZZ, 
which is above AA. The line ZZ represents the demand for domestic goods. The distance 
between ZZ and AA equals exports, X. Because exports do not depend on domestic income 
(they depend on foreign income), the distance between ZZ and AA is constant, which is 
why the two lines are parallel. Because AA is flatter than DD, ZZ is also flatter than DD.
From the information in Figure 18-1(c) we can also characterize the behavior of 
net exports—the difference between exports and imports 1X - IM>e2—as a function of 
output. At output level Y, for example, exports are given by the distance AC and imports 
by the distance AB, so net exports are given by the distance BC.
This relation between net exports and output is represented as the line NX (for Net 
eXports) in Figure 18-1(d). Net exports are a decreasing function of output: As output 
increases, imports increase and exports are unaffected, so net exports decrease. Call YTB (TB 
for trade balance) the level of output at which the value of imports equals the value of exports, 
so that net exports are equal to zero. Levels of output above YTB lead to higher imports and to 
a trade deficit. Levels of output below YTB lead to lower imports and to a trade surplus.
18-2  EQUILIBRIUM OUTPUT AND  
THE TRADE BALANCE
The goods market is in equilibrium when domestic output equals the demand—both 
domestic and foreign—for domestic goods.
Y = Z
Collecting the relations we derived for the components of the demand for domestic 
goods, Z, we get
 
Y = C1Y - T2 + I1Y, r2 + G - IM1Y, e2>e + X1Y *, e2 
(18.4)
This equilibrium condition determines output as a function of all the variables we 
take as given, from taxes to the real exchange rate to foreign output. This is not a simple 
relation; Figure 18-2 represents it graphically in a more user-friendly way.
In Figure 18-2(a), demand is measured on the vertical axis, output (equivalently 
production or income) on the horizontal axis. The line ZZ plots demand as a function of 
output; this line just replicates the line ZZ in Figure 18-1(c). ZZ is upward sloping, but 
with a slope less than 1.
Equilibrium output is at the point where demand equals output, at the intersection 
of the line ZZ and the 45-degree line: point A in Figure 18-2(a), with associated output 
level Y.
Figure 18-2(b) replicates Figure 18-1(d), drawing net exports as a decreasing 
function of output. There is in general no reason why the equilibrium level of out-
put, Y, should be the same as the level of output at which trade is balanced, YTB. As 
shown in the figure, equilibrium output is associated with a trade deficit, equal to the 
For a given real exchange 
rate e, IM>e—the value of 
imports in terms of domestic 
goods—moves exactly with 
IM, the quantity of imports.
b
Recall that net exports is 
 synonymous with trade 
 balance. Positive net exports 
correspond to a trade 
 surplus; negative net exports 
correspond to a trade deficit.
b
The equilibrium level of 
 output is given by the 
 condition Y = Z. The level 
of output at which there is 
trade balance is given by the 
 condition X = IM>e. These 
are two  different conditions.
b


=== PAGE 180 ===
380 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
distance BC. The figure could be drawn differently, so that equilibrium output is asso-
ciated instead with a trade surplus.
We now have the tools needed to answer the questions we asked at the beginning of 
this chapter.
18-3  INCREASES IN DEMAND—DOMESTIC 
OR FOREIGN
How do changes in demand affect output in an open economy? Let’s start with what is by 
now an old favorite, an increase in government spending, then turn to a new exercise, on 
the effects of an increase in foreign demand.
Increases in Domestic Demand
Suppose the economy is in a recession and the government decides to increase govern-
ment spending in order to increase domestic demand and, in turn, output. What will be 
the effects on output and on the trade balance?
The answer is given in Figure 18-3. Before the increase in government spending, 
demand is given by ZZ in Figure 18-3(a) and the equilibrium is at point A, where output 
equals Y. Let’s assume that trade is initially balanced—even though, as we have seen, 
there is no reason why this should be true in general. So, in Figure 18-3(b), Y = YTB.
What happens if the government increases spending by ∆G? At any level of out-
put, demand is higher by ∆G, shifting the demand relation up by ∆G from ZZ to ZZ′. The 
As I did in the core, I start with 
just the goods market and 
introduce financial  markets 
and labor markets later.
c
Demand, Z
ZZ
Output, Y
Output, Y
Y
A
(a)
45°
Net exports, NX
NX
Trade deﬁcit
(b)
0
B
C
YTB
Figure 18-2
Equilibrium Output and 
Net Exports
The goods market is in equi-
librium when domestic  output 
is equal to the demand for 
domestic goods. At the equi-
librium level of output, the 
trade balance may show a 
deficit or a surplus.


=== PAGE 181 ===
 
Chapter 18 
The Goods Market in an Open Economy 
381
equilibrium point moves from A to A¿ and output increases from Y to Y′. The increase in 
output is larger than the increase in government spending: There is a multiplier effect.
So far, the story sounds the same as that for a closed economy in Chapter 3. However, 
there are two important differences:
 
■
There is now an effect on the trade balance. Because government spending enters 
neither the exports relation nor the imports relation directly, the relation between 
net exports and output in Figure 18-3(b) does not shift. So the increase in output 
from Y to Y′ leads to a trade deficit equal to BC: Imports go up, and exports do not 
change.
 
■
Not only does government spending now generate a trade deficit, but the effect of gov-
ernment spending on output is smaller than it would be in a closed economy. Recall 
from Chapter 3 that the smaller the slope of the demand relation, the smaller the mul-
tiplier (for example, if ZZ were horizontal, the multiplier would be 1). And recall from 
Figure 18-1 that the demand relation, ZZ, is flatter than the demand relation in the 
closed economy, DD. This means the multiplier is smaller in the open economy.
The trade deficit and the smaller multiplier have the same origin. Because the econ-
omy is open, an increase in demand now falls not only on domestic goods but also on 
foreign goods. So when income increases, the effect on the demand for domestic goods is 
smaller than it would be in a closed economy, leading to a smaller multiplier. And because 
some of the increase in demand falls on imports—and exports are unchanged—the 
result is a trade deficit.
Starting from trade balance, 
an increase in government 
spending leads to a trade 
deficit.
b
An increase in government 
spending increases output. 
The multiplier is smaller than 
in a closed economy.
b
The smaller multiplier and 
the trade deficit have the 
same origin. Some  domestic 
demand falls on foreign 
goods.
b
Demand, Z
ZZ
Output, Y
Output, Y
Y
A
(a)
458
Net exports, NX
NX
Trade deﬁcit
(b)
0
B
DG > 0
C
ZZ
YTB
Y
A
Figure 18-3
The Effects of an Increase 
in Government Spending
An increase in government 
spending leads to an increase 
in output and a trade deficit.


=== PAGE 182 ===
382 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
These two implications are important. In an open economy, an increase in domes-
tic demand has a smaller effect on output than in a closed economy, and an adverse 
effect on the trade balance. Indeed, the more open the economy, the smaller the effect 
on output and the larger the adverse effect on the trade balance. Take the Netherlands, 
for example. As we saw in Chapter 17, the Netherlands’ ratio of exports to GDP is very 
high. It is also true that the Netherlands’ ratio of imports to GDP is very high. When 
domestic demand increases in the Netherlands, much of the increase in demand is likely 
to result in an increase in the demand for foreign goods rather than domestic goods. The 
effect of an increase in government spending is therefore likely to be a large increase in 
the Netherlands’ trade deficit and only a small increase in its output, making domestic 
demand expansion a rather unattractive policy for the Netherlands. Even for the United 
States, which has a much lower import ratio, an increase in demand will be associated 
with a worsening of the trade balance.
Increases in Foreign Demand
Consider now an increase in foreign output, that is, an increase in Y*. This could be due 
to an increase in foreign government spending, G*—the policy change we just analyzed, 
but now taking place abroad. But we do not need to know where the increase in Y* comes 
from to analyze its effects on the US economy.
Figure 18-4 shows the effects of an increase in foreign activity on domestic out-
put and the trade balance. The initial demand for domestic goods is given by ZZ in 
Demand, Z
ZZ
Output, Y
Output, Y
Y
A
C
D
DD
(a)
45°
Net exports, NX
NX
(b)
0
DX > 0
DNX
Domestic 
demand 
for goods
DNX
DX > 0
Demand for 
domestic goods
ZZ
YTB
NX
A
Y
Figure 18-4
The Effects of an Increase 
in Foreign Demand
An increase in foreign demand 
leads to an increase in output 
and a trade surplus.


=== PAGE 183 ===
 
Chapter 18 
The Goods Market in an Open Economy 
383
Figure 18-4(a). The equilibrium is at point A, with output level Y. Let’s again assume 
trade is balanced, so that in Figure 18-4(b) the net exports associated with Y equal zero 
1Y = YTB2.
It will be useful below to refer to the line that shows the domestic demand for goods 
C + I + G as a function of income. This line is drawn as DD. Recall from Figure 18-1 
that DD is steeper than ZZ. The difference between ZZ and DD equals net exports, so that 
if trade is balanced at point A, then ZZ and DD intersect at point A.
Now consider the effects of an increase in foreign output, ∆Y* (for the moment, ignore 
the line DD; we need it only later). Higher foreign output means higher foreign demand, 
including higher foreign demand for US goods. So the direct effect of the increase in  foreign 
output is an increase in US exports by some amount, which we shall denote by ∆X.
 
■
For a given level of output, this increase in exports leads to an increase in the demand 
for US goods by ∆X, so the line showing the demand for domestic goods as a function 
of output shifts up by ∆X, from ZZ to ZZ′.
 
■
For a given level of output, net exports go up by ∆X. So the line showing net exports 
as a function of output in Figure 18-4(b) also shifts up by ∆X, from NX to NX′.
The new equilibrium is at point A′ in Figure 18-4(a), with output level Y′. The 
increase in foreign output leads to an increase in domestic output: Higher foreign out-
put leads to higher exports of domestic goods, which increases domestic output and the 
domestic demand for goods through the multiplier.
What happens to the trade balance? We know that exports go up. But could it be that 
the increase in domestic output leads to such a large increase in imports that the trade 
balance actually deteriorates? No: The trade balance must improve. To see why, note that, 
when foreign demand increases, the demand for domestic goods shifts up from ZZ to ZZ′; 
but the line DD, which gives the domestic demand for goods as a function of output, does 
not shift. At the new equilibrium level of output Y′, domestic demand is given by the dis-
tance DC, and the demand for domestic goods is given by DA′. Net exports are therefore 
given by the distance CA′—which, because DD is necessarily below ZZ′, is necessarily 
positive. Thus, the increase in imports does not offset the increase in exports, and the 
trade balance improves.
Fiscal Policy Revisited
We have derived two results so far:
 
■
An increase in domestic demand leads to an increase in domestic output but also to 
a deterioration of the trade balance. (We looked at an increase in government spend-
ing, but the results would have been the same for a decrease in taxes, an increase in 
consumer spending, and so on.)
 
■
An increase in foreign demand (which could come from the same types of changes 
taking place abroad) leads to an increase in domestic output and an improvement in 
the trade balance.
These results, in turn, have two important implications. Both were in evidence dur-
ing the Great Financial Crisis.
First, and most obviously, they imply that shocks to demand in one country affect 
other countries. The stronger the trade links between countries, the stronger the interac-
tions, and the more countries will move together. This is what we saw in Figure 17–1. 
Although the crisis started in the United States, it quickly affected the rest of the world. 
Trade links were not the only reason; financial links also played a central role. But the 
evidence points to a strong effect of trade, starting with a decrease in exports from other 
countries to the United States.
DD is the domestic demand 
for goods. ZZ is the demand 
for domestic goods. The 
 difference between the two is 
equal to the trade deficit.
b
Y* directly affects exports 
and so enters the relation 
between the demand for 
domestic goods and out-
put. An increase in Y* shifts 
ZZ up. Y* does not affect 
domestic  consumption, 
domestic investment,  
or domestic  government 
spending directly, and so it 
does not enter the  relation 
between the domestic 
demand for goods and 
 output. An increase in Y* 
does not shift DD.
b
An increase in foreign output 
increases domestic output and 
improves the trade balance.
b


=== PAGE 184 ===
384 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Second, these interactions complicate the task of policymakers, especially in the case 
of fiscal policy. Let’s explore this argument more closely.
Start with the following observation: Governments do not like to run trade deficits 
and for good reasons. The main reason: A country that consistently runs a trade deficit 
accumulates debt vis-à-vis the rest of the world, and therefore has to pay steadily higher 
interest payments to the rest of the world. Thus, it is no wonder that countries prefer 
increases in foreign demand (which improve the trade balance) to increases in domestic 
demand (which worsen the trade balance).
But these preferences can have disastrous implications. Consider a group of coun-
tries, all doing a large amount of trade with each other, so that an increase in demand in 
any one country falls largely on the goods produced in the other countries. Suppose all 
these countries are in recession and each has roughly balanced trade to start. In this case, 
each country might be reluctant to take measures to increase domestic demand. Were it to 
do so, the result might be a small increase in output but also a large trade deficit. Instead, 
each country might just wait for the other countries to increase their demand. This way, 
The G20 and the 2009 Fiscal Stimulus
In November 2008, the leaders of the G20 countries gath-
ered for an emergency meeting in Washington. The G20, a 
group of ministers of finance and central bank governors 
from 20 countries, including both the major advanced and 
the major emerging countries in the world, was created in 
1999 but had not played a major role until the crisis. With 
mounting evidence that the crisis was going to be both deep 
and widespread, the group met to coordinate their responses 
in terms of both macroeconomic and financial policies.
On the macroeconomic front, it had become clear that 
monetary policy would not be enough, and so the focus 
turned to fiscal policy. The decrease in output was going to 
lead to a decrease in revenues, and thus an increase in bud-
get deficits. Dominique Strauss-Kahn, then the managing 
director of the International Monetary Fund, argued that 
further fiscal actions were needed and suggested taking addi-
tional discretionary measures—either decreases in taxes or 
increases in spending—adding up to roughly 2% of GDP on 
average for each country. This is what he said:
“The fiscal stimulus is now essential to restore global 
growth. Each country’s fiscal stimulus can be twice as effec-
tive in raising domestic output growth if its major trading 
partners also have a stimulus package.”
He noted that some countries had more room for maneu-
ver than others: “We believe that those countries—advanced 
and emerging economies—with the strongest fiscal policy 
frameworks, the best ability to finance fiscal expansion, and 
the most clearly sustainable debt should take the lead.”
Over the next few months, most countries did indeed 
adopt measures aimed at increasing either private or public 
spending. For the G20 as a whole, discretionary measures 
added up to about 2.3% of GDP in 2009. Some countries 
with less fiscal room, such as Italy, did less; some countries, 
such as the United States or France, did more.
Was this fiscal stimulus successful? Some have argued that 
it was not. After all, the world economy had large negative 
growth in 2009. The issue here is one of counterfactuals. 
What would have happened in the absence of the stimulus? 
Many believe that, absent the fiscal stimulus, growth would 
have been even more negative, perhaps catastrophically so. 
Counterfactuals are hard to prove or disprove, and thus the 
controversy is likely to go on. (On the issue of counterfactuals 
and the difference between economists and politicians, there 
is a nice quote from former US congressman Barney Frank:
“Not for the first time, as an elected official, I envy econo-
mists. Economists have available to them, in an analytical 
approach, the counterfactual. Economists can explain that a 
given decision was the best one that could be made, because 
they can show what would have happened in the counter-
factual situation. They can contrast what happened to what 
would have happened. No one has ever gotten reelected 
where the bumper sticker said, ‘It would have been worse 
without me.’ You probably can get tenure with that. But you 
can’t win office.”)
Was this fiscal stimulus dangerous? Some have argued 
that it led to a large increase in public debt, which forced gov-
ernments to adjust, leading to a fiscal contraction and mak-
ing recovery more difficult (we discussed this in Chapter 5  
and will return to it in Chapter 22). This argument is 
largely misplaced. Most of  the increase in debt came not 
from the discretionary measures that were taken, but from 
the decrease in revenues due to the decrease in output 
during the crisis. Debt would have increased even in the 
absence of  the discretionary measures. It remains true, 
however, that the large increase in debt led governments 
to adopt a contractionary fiscal policy and that it probably 
slowed down the recovery.
For more of the discussion at the time, see “Financial Crisis 
Response: IMF Spells Out Need for Global Fiscal Stimulus,” in 
IMF Survey Magazine Online, December 29, 2008 (www.imf.
org/external/pubs/ft/survey/so/2008/int122908a.htm).
FOCUS


=== PAGE 185 ===
 
Chapter 18 
The Goods Market in an Open Economy 
385
it gets the best of both worlds—higher output and an improvement in its trade balance. 
But if all the countries wait, nothing will happen, and the recession may last a long time.
Is there a way out? There is—at least in theory. If all countries coordinate their mac-
roeconomic policies so as to increase domestic demand simultaneously, each can increase 
demand and output without increasing its trade deficit (vis-à-vis the others; their com-
bined trade deficit with respect to the rest of the world will still increase). The reason is 
clear. The coordinated increase in demand leads to increases in both exports and imports 
in each country. It is still true that domestic demand expansion leads to larger imports; 
but this increase in imports is offset by the increase in exports, which comes from the 
foreign demand expansions.
In practice, however, policy coordination is not so easy to achieve.
Some countries might have to do more than others and may not want to do so. Suppose 
that only some countries are in recession. Countries that are not in a recession will be reluc-
tant to increase their own demand; but if they do not, the countries that expand will run 
a trade deficit vis-à-vis countries that do not. Or suppose some countries are already run-
ning a large budget deficit. These countries might not want to cut taxes or further increase 
spending as this would further increase their deficits. They will ask other countries to take 
on more of the adjustment. Those other countries may be reluctant to do so.
Countries also have a strong incentive to promise to coordinate and then not deliver 
on their promise. Once all countries have agreed to, say, an increase in spending, each 
country has an incentive not to deliver, so as to benefit from the increase in demand else-
where and thereby improve its trade position. But if each country cheats, or does not 
do everything it promised, there will be insufficient demand expansion to get out of the 
recession.
The result is that, despite declarations by governments at international meetings, 
coordination often fizzles. Only when things are really bad does coordination appear to 
take hold. This was the case in 2009 and is explored in the Focus Box “The G20 and the 
2009 Fiscal Stimulus.”
18-4  DEPRECIATION, THE TRADE 
BALANCE, AND OUTPUT
Suppose the US government takes policy measures that lead to a depreciation of the 
 dollar—a decrease in the nominal exchange rate. (We shall see in Chapter 20 how this 
can be done by using monetary policy. For the moment I shall assume the government 
can simply set the exchange rate.)
Recall that the real exchange rate is given by
e = E P
P*
The real exchange rate, e (the price of domestic goods in terms of foreign goods), is 
equal to the nominal exchange rate, E (the price of domestic currency in terms of foreign 
currency), times the domestic price level, P, divided by the foreign price level, P *. In the 
short run, we can take the two price levels P and P * as given. This implies that the nomi-
nal depreciation is reflected one-for-one in a real depreciation. More concretely, if the dol-
lar depreciates vis-à-vis the yen by 10% (a 10% nominal depreciation) and if price levels 
in Japan and the United States do not change, US goods will be 10% cheaper compared to 
Japanese goods (a 10% real depreciation).
Let’s now ask how this real depreciation will affect the US trade balance and US 
output.
Given P and P *, E increases  
1 e = EP
P * increases.
b
A look ahead: In Chapter 20, 
we shall look at the effects of 
a nominal depreciation when 
we allow the price level to 
adjust over time. You will see 
that a nominal depreciation 
leads to a real depreciation 
in the short run but not in the 
medium run.
b


=== PAGE 186 ===
386 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Depreciation and the Trade Balance:  
the Marshall-Lerner Condition
Return to the definition of net exports:
NX = X - IM>e
Replace X and IM by their expressions from equations (18.2) and (18.3):
NX = X1Y *, e2 - IM1Y, e2>e
As the real exchange rate e enters the right side of the equation in three places, this 
makes it clear that the real depreciation affects the trade balance through three separate 
channels:
 
■
Exports, X, increase. The real depreciation makes US goods relatively less expensive 
abroad. This leads to an increase in foreign demand for US goods—an increase in US 
exports.
 
■
Imports, IM, decrease. The real depreciation makes foreign goods relatively more 
expensive in the United States. This leads to a shift in domestic demand toward 
domestic goods and to a decrease in the quantity of imports.
 
■
The relative price of foreign goods in terms of domestic goods, 1>e, increases. For given 
IM, this increases the import bill, IM>e. The same quantity of imports now costs 
more to buy (in terms of domestic goods).
For the trade balance to improve following a depreciation, exports must increase 
enough and imports must decrease enough to compensate for the increase in the price 
of imports. The condition under which a real depreciation leads to an increase in net 
exports is known as the Marshall-Lerner condition. (It is derived formally in the 
appendix, called “Derivation of the Marshall Lerner-Condition,” at the end of this chap-
ter.) It turns out—with a complication we will state when we introduce dynamics later in 
this chapter—that this condition is satisfied in reality. So, for the rest of this book, I shall 
assume that a real depreciation—a decrease in e—leads to an increase in net exports—
an increase in NX.
The Effects of a Real Depreciation
We have looked so far at the direct effects of a depreciation on the trade balance—that is, 
the effects given US and foreign output. But the effects do not end there. The change in net 
exports changes domestic output, which further affects net exports.
Because the effects of a real depreciation are much like those of an increase in for-
eign output, we can use Figure 18-4 to show the effects of an increase in foreign output.
Just like an increase in foreign output, a depreciation leads to an increase in net 
exports (assuming, as we do, that the Marshall-Lerner condition holds) at any level of 
output. Both the demand relation (ZZ in Figure 18-4(a)) and the net exports relation (NX 
in Figure 18-4(b)) shift up. The equilibrium moves from A to A′, and output increases 
from Y to Y′. By the same argument we used previously, the trade balance improves. The 
increase in imports induced by the increase in output is smaller than the direct improve-
ment in the trade balance induced by the depreciation.
To summarize: The depreciation leads to a shift in demand, both foreign and domes-
tic, toward domestic goods. This shift in demand leads, in turn, to both an increase in 
domestic output and an improvement in the trade balance.
Although a depreciation and an increase in foreign output have the same effect on 
domestic output and the trade balance, there is a subtle but important difference between 
the two. A depreciation works by making foreign goods relatively more expensive. But this 
It is named after the two 
economists, Alfred Marshall 
and Abba Lerner, who first 
derived it.
c
More concretely, if the dollar 
depreciates vis-à-vis the yen 
by 10%:
US goods will be cheaper 
in Japan, leading to a larger 
quantity of US exports to 
Japan.
Japanese goods will 
be more expensive in the 
United States, leading to a 
smaller quantity of imports 
of Japanese goods to the 
United States and a higher 
import bill for a given quan-
tity of imports of Japanese 
goods to the United States.
c


=== PAGE 187 ===
 
Chapter 18 
The Goods Market in an Open Economy 
387
means that, for a given income, people—who now pay more to buy foreign goods because 
of the depreciation—are worse off. This mechanism is strongly felt in countries that go 
through a large depreciation. Governments trying to achieve a large depreciation often find 
themselves with strikes and riots in the streets as people react to the much higher prices of 
imported goods. This was the case in Mexico, for example, where the large depreciation of 
the peso in 1994–1995—from 29 cents per peso in November 1994 to 17 cents per peso in 
May 1995—led to a large decline in workers’ living standards and to social unrest.
Combining Exchange Rate and Fiscal Policies
Suppose output is at its natural level but the economy is running a large trade deficit. The 
government would like to reduce the trade deficit while leaving output unchanged so as 
to avoid overheating. What should it do?
A depreciation alone will not do. It will reduce the trade deficit, but it will also 
increase output. Nor will a fiscal contraction do. It will reduce the trade deficit, but it will 
decrease output. What should the government do? The answer: Use the right combina-
tion of depreciation and fiscal contraction. Figure 18-5 shows what this combination 
should be.
Suppose the initial equilibrium in Figure 18-5(a) is at A, associated with output Y. 
At this level of output, there is a trade deficit, given by the distance BC in Figure 18-5(b). 
There is an alternative 
to  rioting asking for and 
 obtaining an increase in 
wages. But if wages increase, 
the prices of domestic goods 
will increase as well, leading 
to a smaller real depreciation. 
To discuss this mechanism, 
we need to look at the supply 
side in more detail than we 
have done so far. We return to 
the dynamics of depreciation, 
wage and price movements in 
Chapter 20.
b
Demand, Z
ZZ
Output, Y
Output, Y
Y
A
(a)
45°
Net exports, NX
(b)
NX
B
C
0
∆NX > 0
∆NX > 0
∆G < 0
Demand for 
domestic goods
ZZ
NX
Y
A
Figure 18-5
Reducing the Trade 
Deficit without 
Changing Output
To reduce the trade deficit 
without changing output, the 
government must both achieve 
a depreciation and decrease 
government spending.


=== PAGE 188 ===
The Disappearance of the Current Account Deficit  
in Greece: Good News or Bad News?
Starting in the early 2000s, several euro periphery countries 
ran larger and larger current account deficits. Particularly strik-
ing was the increase in the current account deficit of Greece. As 
shown in Figure 1, the current account went from an already 
large deficit of 6% of GDP in 2000 to more than 15% in 2008. 
When the Great Financial crisis started, Greece found it increas-
ingly difficult to borrow abroad, forcing it to reduce borrowing 
and thus to reduce its current account deficit. But by 2018, the 
current account deficit was less than 1% of GDP.
It is an impressive turnaround. Is it unambiguously good 
news? Not necessarily. The discussion in the text suggests 
that there are two ways a current account may improve. The 
first is that the country becomes more competitive: The real 
exchange rate decreases, exports increase, imports decrease, 
and the current account balance improves. The second is 
that the country’s output decreases: Exports, which depend 
on what happens in the rest of the world, may remain the 
same, but imports come down with output, and the current 
account balance improves.
Unfortunately, the evidence is that the second mecha-
nism played a central role in the adjustment.
Given that Greece is a member of  the euro area, it 
could not rely on an adjustment of  the nominal exchange 
rate to become more competitive, at least vis-à-vis its euro 
FOCUS
Table 18-1  Exchange Rate and Fiscal Policy  
Combinations
Initial Conditions
Trade Surplus
Trade Deficit
Low output
E? Gy
Ev G?
High output
Ey G?
E? Gv
If the government wants to eliminate the trade deficit without changing output, it must 
do two things:
 
■
It must achieve a depreciation sufficient to eliminate the trade deficit at the initial 
level of output. So the depreciation must be such as to shift the net exports relation 
from NX to NX′ in Figure 18-5(b). The problem is that this depreciation, and the 
associated increase in net exports, also shifts the demand relation in Figure 18-5(a) 
from ZZ to ZZ′. In the absence of other measures, the equilibrium would move from 
A to A′ and output would increase from Y to Y′.
 
■
To avoid the increase in output, it must therefore reduce government spending so as 
to shift ZZ′ back to ZZ. This combination of a depreciation and a fiscal contraction 
leads to the same level of output and an improved trade balance.
There is a general point behind this example. To the extent that governments care 
about both the level of output and the trade balance, they have to use both fiscal policy and 
exchange rate policies. We just saw one such combination. Table 18-1 gives you others, 
depending on the initial output and trade situation. Take, for example, the box in the top 
right corner of the table: Initial output is too low (put another way, unemployment is too 
high) and the economy has a trade deficit. A depreciation will help on both the trade and 
the output fronts: It reduces the trade deficit and increases output. But there is no reason 
for the depreciation to achieve both the correct increase in output and the elimination of 
the trade deficit. Depending on the initial situation and the relative effects of the deprecia-
tion on output and the trade balance, the government may need to complement the depre-
ciation with either an increase or a decrease in government spending. This ambiguity is 
captured by the question mark. Make sure that you understand the logic behind each of 
the other three boxes. (For another example of the role of the real exchange rate and out-
put in affecting the current account balance, look at the Focus Box “The Disappearance of 
the Current Account Deficit in Greece: Good News or Bad News?”)
If this combination seems 
quite different from the 
policy adopted by the Trump 
 administration to reduce the 
US trade deficit, you are right. 
More on this in Chapter 19.
c
A general lesson: If you 
want to achieve two targets 
(here, output and trade 
 balance), you better use 
two  instruments (here, fiscal 
 policy and the exchange rate).
c
388 
The Open Economy 
Extensions


=== PAGE 189 ===
partners. It had to rely on a decrease in wages and prices, 
and this has proven to be slow and difficult (more on this in 
Chapter 20).
Instead, much of  the adjustment has taken place 
through a decrease in imports, triggered by a decrease in 
output, an adjustment known as import  compression. 
Figure 2 shows the evolution of  imports, exports, and 
GDP in Greece since 2000. All three series are normal-
ized to equal 1.0 in 2000. Note first how much output has 
decreased from its peak, by roughly 30% since 2008. Note 
then how imports have moved in tandem with output, 
also decreasing by 36% since 2008. Exports have done 
better but not great. After sharply decreasing in 2009, 
reflecting the world crisis and the decrease in demand 
from the rest of  the world, they are only 10% above their 
2008 level (world output growth since 2008 has been a 
cumulative 34%).
In short, the disappearance of the current account defi-
cit in Greece is, on net, largely bad news. Turning to the 
future, what happens to the current account next depends 
largely on what happens to output, and this in turn depends 
on where output is relative to potential output. If much of 
the decrease in actual output reflects a decrease in potential 
output, then output will remain low and the current account 
will remain in balance. If, as seems more likely, actual output 
is still far below potential output (if there is, in the terminol-
ogy of Chapter 9, a large negative output gap), then unless 
further real depreciation takes place, the return of output 
to potential will come with higher imports, and thus a likely 
return to current account deficits.
 
Chapter 18 
The Goods Market in an Open Economy 
389
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
0.80
0.90
1.00
1.10
1.20
Index 2000 = 1 
1.30
1.40
1.50
Real GDP
Real Imports
Real Exports
Figure 2
Imports, Exports, and GDP in 
Greece since 2000
Source: IMF Managing Director 
Dominique Strauss-Kahn Calls 
G-20 Action Plan Significant Step 
toward Stronger International 
Cooperation, Press Release No. 
08/286, November 15, 2008.
216
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
214
212
210
28
26
24
22
0
2
Percent of GDP
Figure 1
The Evolution of the Greek 
Current Account Deficit since 
2000
Source: IMF Managing Director 
Dominique Strauss-Kahn Calls 
G-20 Action Plan Significant Step 
toward Stronger International 
Cooperation, Press Release  
No. 08/286, November 15, 2008.


=== PAGE 190 ===
390 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
18-5  SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE 
CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE
You saw in Chapter 3 that we could rewrite the condition for equilibrium in the goods 
market as the condition that investment was equal to saving—the sum of  private and 
public saving. We can now derive the corresponding condition for the open econ-
omy, and you will see how useful this alternative way of  looking at the equilibrium 
can be.
Start from our equilibrium condition
Y = C + I + G - IM>e + X
Move consumption, C, from the right side to the left side of the equation, subtract 
taxes, T, from both sides, and denote net exports 1IM>e + X2 by NX to get
Y - T - C = I + 1G - T2 + NX
Recall that, in an open economy, the total income of domestic residents is equal to 
domestic income, which is equal to domestic output, Y, plus net income from abroad, NI. 
Add NI to both sides of the equation:
1Y + NI - T2 - C = I + 1G - T2 + 1NX + NI2
Note that the term in parentheses on the left side is equal to disposable income, so 
the left side is equal to disposable income minus consumption (i.e., private saving, S). The 
sum of net exports and net income from abroad on the right side is equal to the current 
account. Denote the current account by CA and rewrite the previous equation as:
S = I + 1G - T2 + CA
Reorganize the equation to read:
 
CA = S + 1T - G2 - I 
(18.5)
The current account balance is equal to saving (private plus public) minus invest-
ment. A current account surplus implies that the country is saving more than it invests. 
A current account deficit implies that the country is saving less than it invests.
One way of getting more intuition for this relation is to go back to the discussion of 
the current account and the financial account in Chapter 17. There we saw that a cur-
rent account surplus implies net lending from the country to the rest of the world, and a 
current account deficit implies net borrowing by the country from the rest of the world.
Consider a country that invests more than it saves, so that S + 1T - G2 - I is nega-
tive. That country must be borrowing the difference from the rest of the world, and must 
therefore be running a current account deficit. Symmetrically, a country that lends to the 
rest of the world is a country that saves more than it invests.
Note some of the things that equation (18.5) says:
 
■
An increase in investment must be reflected in either an increase in private or pub-
lic saving or a deterioration of the current account balance—a smaller current 
account surplus, or a larger current account deficit, depending on whether the cur-
rent account is initially in surplus or in deficit.
 
■
A deterioration in the government budget balance—either a smaller budget surplus 
or a larger budget deficit—must be reflected either in an increase in private saving or 
a decrease in investment, or in a deterioration of the current account balance.
 
■
A country with a high saving rate (private plus public) must have either a high 
investment rate or a large current account surplus.
Getting there involves some 
manipulations, but do not 
worry—the end result is 
intuitive.
c
Commentators often do not 
make a distinction between 
the trade balance and the 
current account balance. This 
is not necessarily a major 
crime: Because net income 
typically moves slowly over 
time, the trade and current 
account balances typically 
move closely together. In 
the United States, however, 
net income is large, so the 
current account balance 
 typically looks much better 
than the trade balance.
c


=== PAGE 191 ===
 
Chapter 18 
The Goods Market in an Open Economy 
391
Note also, however, what equation (18.5) does not say.
It does not say, for example, whether a government budget deficit will lead to a cur-
rent account deficit, or instead to an increase in private saving or a decrease in invest-
ment. To find out what happens in response to a budget deficit, we must explicitly solve 
for what happens to output and its components using the assumptions that we have 
made about consumption, investment, exports, and imports. That is, we need to do the 
complete analysis laid out in this chapter. Using only equation (18.5) can, if you are 
not careful, be very misleading. To see how misleading, consider, for example, the fol-
lowing argument (which is so common that you may have read something similar in 
newspapers):
“It is clear that the United States cannot reduce its large current account deficit 
through a depreciation. Look at equation (18.5). It shows that the current account 
deficit is equal to investment minus saving. Why should a depreciation affect either 
saving or investment? So how can a depreciation affect the current account deficit?”
The argument might sound convincing, but we know it is wrong. We showed ear-
lier that a depreciation leads to an improvement in a country’s trade position and, by 
 implication—given net income—an improvement in the current account. What is 
wrong with the argument? A depreciation actually does affect saving and investment, by 
affecting the demand for domestic goods and thereby increasing output. Higher output 
leads to an increase in saving over investment, or equivalently, to a decrease in the cur-
rent account deficit.
A good way to make sure you understand the material in this section is to go back 
and look at the various cases we have considered—changes in government spending, 
changes in foreign output, combinations of depreciation and fiscal contraction, and so 
on. Trace what happens in each case to each of the four components of equation (18.5): 
private saving, public saving (equivalently, the budget surplus), investment, and the cur-
rent account balance. Make sure, as always, that you can tell the story in words.
Let me end the chapter with a challenge. Assess the following three statements and 
decide which one(s) is (are) right:
 
■
The large US current account deficit (which you saw in Chapter 17) shows that 
the United States is no longer competitive. It is a sign of weakness. Forget saving or 
investment. The United States must urgently improve its competitiveness.
 
■
The large US current account deficit shows that the United States just does not save 
enough to finance its investment. It is a sign of weakness. Forget competitiveness. 
The United States must urgently increase its saving rate.
 
■
The large US current account deficit is just a mirror image of the US financial 
account surplus. What is happening is that the rest of the world wants to put its 
funds in the United States. The US financial account surplus, and by implication, the 
US current account deficit, is in fact a sign of strength, and there is no need to take 
policy measures to reduce it.
Suppose, for example, that 
the US government wants to 
reduce the current account 
deficit without changing the 
level of output, so it uses a 
combination of  depreciation 
and fiscal contraction. 
What happens to private 
saving, public saving, and 
investment?
b


=== PAGE 192 ===
392 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
SUMMARY
 
■In an open economy, the demand for domestic goods is 
equal to the domestic demand for goods (consumption plus 
investment plus government spending) minus the value of 
imports (in terms of domestic goods) plus exports.
 
■In an open economy, an increase in domestic demand leads 
to a smaller increase in output than it would in a closed 
economy because some of the additional demand falls 
on imports. For the same reason, an increase in domestic 
demand also leads to a deterioration of the trade balance.
 
■An increase in foreign demand leads, as a result of 
increased exports, to both an increase in domestic output 
and an improvement of the trade balance.
 
■Because increases in foreign demand improve the trade bal-
ance and increases in domestic demand worsen the trade 
balance, countries might be tempted to wait for increases 
in foreign demand to move them out of a recession. When 
a group of countries is in recession, coordination can, in 
principle, help their recovery.
 
■If the Marshall-Lerner condition is satisfied—and the 
empirical evidence indicates that it is—a real depreciation 
leads to an improvement in net exports.
 
■The condition for equilibrium in the goods market can 
be rewritten as the condition that saving (public and 
private) minus investment must be equal to the  current 
account balance. A current account surplus corre-
sponds to an excess of saving over investment. A current 
account deficit corresponds to an excess of investment 
over saving.
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using the information in this chapter, label each of the following 
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. The reduction in the current account deficit in Greece 
from 2008 to 2018 means that citizens in Greece are bet-
ter off.
b. The national income identity implies that budget deficits 
cause trade deficits.
c. Opening the economy to trade tends to increase the mul-
tiplier because an increase in expenditure leads to more 
exports.
d. If the trade deficit is equal to zero, then the domestic 
demand for goods and the demand for domestic goods are 
equal.
e. A small open economy can reduce its trade deficit through 
fiscal contraction at a smaller cost in output than can a 
large open economy.
f. A decline in real income can lead to a decline in imports 
and thus a trade surplus.
g. In joining the Euro, Greece made real exchange rate 
adjustments with its trading partners easier.
2. Real and nominal exchange rates and inflation
Using the definition of the real exchange rate (and 
Propositions 7 and 8 in Appendix 2 at the end of the book), you 
can show that
1et - et - 12
et - 1
=
1Et - Et - 12
Et - 1
+ pt - pt*
In words, the percentage real appreciation equals the percent-
age nominal appreciation plus the difference between domestic and 
foreign inflation.
a. If domestic inflation is higher than foreign inflation, and 
the domestic country has a fixed exchange rate, what hap-
pens to the real exchange rate over time? Assume that the 
Marshall-Lerner condition holds. What happens to the 
trade balance over time? Explain in words.
b. Suppose the real exchange rate is currently at the level 
required to have the trade balance equal to zero. In this 
case, if domestic inflation is higher than foreign inflation, 
what must happen over time to maintain a trade balance 
of zero?
3. A European recession and the US economy
a. In 2017, European Union spending on US goods accounted for 
19% of US exports (see Table 17-2), and US exports amounted 
to 12.3% of US GDP (see Table 17-1). What was the share of 
European Union spending on US goods relative to US GDP?
b. Assume that the multiplier in the United States is 2 and 
that a major slump in Europe would reduce output and 
imports from the United States by 5% (relative to its nor-
mal level). Given your answer to part a, what is the impact 
of the European slump on US GDP?
c. If the European slump also leads to a slowdown of the 
other economies that import goods from the United States, 
the effect could be larger. To put a bound to the size of the 
effect, assume that US exports decrease by 5% (as a result 
KEY TERMS
demand for domestic goods, 376
domestic demand for goods, 376
G20, 384
policy coordination, 385
Marshall-Lerner condition, 386
import compression, 389


=== PAGE 193 ===
of changes in foreign output) in one year. What is the 
effect of a 5% drop in exports on US GDP?
d. Comment on this statement. “If Europe has a major 
slump, US growth will also grind to a halt. ”
4. A further look at Table 18-1
Table 18-1 has four entries. Using Figure 18-5 as a guide, 
draw the situations illustrated in each of the four entries in  
Table 18-1. Be sure you understand why the direction of change 
in government spending and the real exchange rate is labeled as 
ambiguous in each entry.
DIG DEEPER
5. Net exports and foreign demand
a. Suppose there is an increase in foreign output. Show the 
effect on the domestic economy (i.e., replicate Figure 18-4). 
What is the effect on domestic output? On domestic net 
exports?
b. If the interest rate remains constant, what will happen to 
domestic investment? If taxes are fixed, what will happen 
to the domestic budget deficit?
c. Using equation (18.5), what must happen to private sav-
ing? Explain.
d. Foreign output does not appear in equation (18.5), yet it 
evidently affects net exports. Explain how this is possible.
6. Eliminating a trade deficit
a. Consider an economy with a trade deficit (NX < 0) and 
with output equal to its natural level. Suppose that, even 
though output may deviate from its natural level in the 
short run, it returns to its natural level in the medium 
run. Assume that the natural level is unaffected by the real 
exchange rate. What must happen to the real exchange 
rate over the medium run to eliminate the trade deficit 
(i.e., to increase NX to 0)?
b. Now write down the national income identity. Assume 
again that output returns to its natural level in the 
medium run. If NX increases to 0, what must happen to 
domestic demand 1C + I + G2 in the medium run? What 
government policies are available to reduce domestic 
demand in the medium run? Identify which components 
of domestic demand each of these policies affects.
7. Multipliers, openness, and fiscal policy
Consider an open economy characterized by the following 
equations:
C = c0 + c11Y - T2
I = d0 + d1Y
IM = m1Y
X = x1Y*
The parameters m1 and x1 are the propensities to import and 
export. Assume that the real exchange rate is fixed at a value of 1 
and treat foreign income, Y*, as fixed. Also assume that taxes are 
fixed and that government purchases are exogenous (i.e., decided 
by the government). We explore the effectiveness of changes in G 
under alternative assumptions about the propensity to import.
a. Write the equilibrium condition in the market for domes-
tic goods and solve for Y.
b. Suppose 
government 
purchases 
increase 
by 
one 
unit. What is the effect on output? (Assume that 
0 6 m1 6 c1 + d1 6 1. Explain why.)
c. How do net exports change when government purchases 
increase by one unit?
Now consider two economies, one with m1 = 0.5 and the 
other with m1 = 0.1. Each economy is characterized by 
1c1 + d12 = 0.6.
d. Suppose one of the economies is much larger than the 
other. Which economy do you expect to have the larger 
value of m1? Explain.
e. Calculate your answers to parts b and c for each economy 
by substituting the appropriate parameter values.
f. In which economy will fiscal policy have a larger effect on 
output? In which economy will fiscal policy have a larger 
effect on net exports?
8. Policy coordination and the world economy
Consider an open economy in which the real exchange rate 
is fixed and equal to one. Consumption, investment, government 
spending, and taxes are given by
C = 10 + 0.81Y - T2, I = 10, G = 10, and T = 10
Imports and exports are given by
IM = 0.3 Y and X = 0.3 Y *
where Y* denotes foreign output.
a. Solve for equilibrium output in the domestic economy, 
given Y*. What is the multiplier in this economy? If we were 
to close the economy—so that exports and imports were 
identically equal to zero—what would the multiplier be? 
Why would the multiplier be different in a closed economy?
b. Assume that the foreign economy is characterized by the 
same equations as the domestic economy (with asterisks 
reversed). Use the two sets of equations to solve for the 
equilibrium output of each country. (Hint: Use the equa-
tions for the foreign economy to solve for Y * as a function 
of Y and substitute this solution for Y * in part a.) What is 
the multiplier for each country now? Why is it different 
from the open economy multiplier in part a?
c. Assume that the domestic government, G, has a target 
level of output of 125. Assuming that the foreign gov-
ernment does not change G *, what is the increase in G 
necessary to achieve the target output in the domestic 
economy? Solve for net exports and the budget deficit in 
each country.
d. Suppose each government has a target level of output 
of 125 and that each government increases govern-
ment spending by the same amount. What is the com-
mon increase in G and G * necessary to achieve the target 
output in both countries? Solve for net exports and the 
budget deficit in each country.
e. Why is fiscal coordination, such as the common increase 
in G and G * in part d, difficult to achieve in practice?
 
Chapter 18 
The Goods Market in an Open Economy 
393


=== PAGE 194 ===
394 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
EXPLORE FURTHER
9. The US trade deficit, current account deficit, and investment
a. Define national saving as private saving plus the govern-
ment surplus—that is, as S + T - G. Now, using equa-
tion (18.5), describe the relation among the current 
account deficit, net investment income, and the difference 
between national saving and domestic investment.
b. Using the FRED economic database, retrieve annual data 
for nominal GDP (series GDPA), gross domestic invest-
ment (series W170RC1A027NBEA), and net exports 
(series A019RC1A027NBEA) from 1980 to the most 
recent year available. Divide gross domestic investment 
and net exports by GDP in each year to express their val-
ues as a percentage of GDP. Which years have the largest 
trade deficits as a percentage of GDP?
c. The trade surplus in 1980 was roughly zero. Compute the 
average ratio of investment to GDP and the average value 
of the trade balance as a percent of GDP in three periods: 
1980–1989, 1990–1999, 2000–2009 and 2010 to the 
latest point. Would it appear that trade deficits have been 
used to finance investment?
d. Is a trade deficit more worrisome when not accompanied 
by a corresponding increase in investment? Explain your 
answer.
e. The previous question focuses on the trade deficit rather 
than the current account deficit. How does net investment 
income (NI) relate to the difference between the trade defi-
cit and the current account deficit in the United States? 
You can download GDP (series GDP) and GNP (series 
GNP) from the FRED database at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of St. Louis. This difference is a measure of NI. Is this 
value rising or falling over time? What is the implication 
of such changes?
FURTHER READINGS
 
■A good discussion of the relation among trade deficits, 
current account deficits, budget deficits, private saving, 
and investment is given in Barry Bosworth’s Saving and 
Investment in a Global Economy (Brookings Institution, 
1993).
 
■For more on the relation between the exchange rate and 
the trade balance, read “Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: 
Disconnected?” Chapter 3, World Economic Outlook, 
International Monetary Fund, October 2015.


=== PAGE 195 ===
 
Chapter 18 
The Goods Market in an Open Economy 
395
APPENDIX: Derivation of the Marshall-Lerner Condition
Start from the definition of net exports
NX = X - IM>e
Assume trade to be initially balanced, so that NX = 0  
and X = IM>e or, equivalently, eX = IM.
The Marshall-Lerner condition is the condition under 
which a real depreciation, a decrease in e, leads to an increase 
in net exports.
To derive this condition, first multiply both sides of the 
equation above by e to get
eNX = eX - IM
Now consider a change in the real exchange rate of ∆e. 
The effect of this change on the left side of the equation is given 
by 1∆e2 NX + e∆1NX2.
Note that, if trade is initially balanced, NX = 0, so the 
first term in this expression is equal to zero and the effect of the 
change on the left side is simply given by e∆1NX2.
The effect of the change in the real exchange 
rate on the right side of the equation is given by 
1∆e2 X + e1∆X2 - 1∆IM2. Putting the two sides together 
gives
e1∆NX2 = 1∆e2 X + e1∆X2 - 1∆IM2
Divide both sides by eX to get:
3e1∆NX24>eX = 31∆e2X4>eX + 3e1∆X24>eX - 3∆IM4>eX
Simplify, and use the fact that, if trade is initially balanced, 
eX = IM to replace eX by IM in the last term on the right. This 
gives
1∆NX2>X = 1∆e2>e + 1∆X2>X - ∆IM>IM
The result is intuitive. The change in the trade balance (as 
a ratio to exports) in response to a real depreciation is the sum 
of three terms:
 
■The first term is equal to the proportional change in the real 
exchange rate. It is negative if there is a real depreciation.
 
■The second term is equal to the proportional change in 
exports. It is positive if there is a real depreciation.
 
■The third term is equal to minus the proportional change in 
imports. It is positive if there is a real depreciation.
The Marshall-Lerner condition is the condition that the 
sum of these three terms be positive. If it is satisfied, a real 
depreciation leads to an improvement in the trade balance.
A numerical example will help here. Suppose that 
a 1% depreciation leads to a proportional increase in exports 
of 0.9% and a proportional decrease in imports of 0.8%. 
(Econometric evidence on the relation of exports and imports to 
the real exchange rate suggests that these are reasonable num-
bers.) In this case, the right-hand side of the equation is equal to 
-1% + 0.9% - 1-0.8%2 = 0.7%. Thus, the trade balance 
improves, and the Marshall-Lerner condition is satisfied.


=== PAGE 196 ===
This page is intentionally left blank


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 196 ===
This page is intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 197 ===
397
Output, the Interest 
Rate, and the 
Exchange Rate
I
n Chapter 18, we treated the exchange rate as one of the policy instruments available 
to the government. But the exchange rate is not a policy instrument. Rather, it is deter-
mined in the foreign exchange market, where, as you saw in Chapter 17, there is an 
enormous amount of trading. This fact raises two obvious questions: What determines 
the exchange rate? How can policymakers affect it?
These questions motivate this chapter. To answer them, we reintroduce financial mar-
kets, which we had left aside in Chapter 18. We examine the implications of equilibrium in 
both the goods market and financial markets, including the foreign exchange market. This 
allows us to characterize the joint movements of output, the interest rate, and the exchange 
rate in an open economy. The model we develop is an extension to the open economy of the 
IS-LM model you first saw in Chapter 5 and is known as the Mundell-Fleming model—after 
the two economists, Robert Mundell and Marcus Fleming, who put it together in the 1960s. 
(The model presented here retains the spirit of the original Mundell-Fleming model but dif-
fers in its details.)
Section 19-1 looks at equilibrium in the goods market.
Section 19-2 looks at equilibrium in financial markets, including the foreign exchange 
market.
Section 19-3 puts the two equilibrium conditions together and looks at the determination 
of output, the interest rate, and the exchange rate.
Section 19-4 looks at the role of policy under flexible exchange rates.
Section 19-5 looks at the role of policy under fixed exchange rates.
19
If you remember one basic message from this chapter, it should be: The effects 
of monetary and fiscal policies differ very much depending on the exchange rate 
regime. 


=== PAGE 198 ===
398 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
19-1   EQUILIBRIUM IN THE GOODS MARKET
Equilibrium in the goods market was the focus of Chapter 18, where we derived the equi-
librium condition equation (18.4):
Y = C1Y - T2 + I1Y, r2 + G - IM1Y, e2>e + X1Y*, e2
1+2   1+,-2      1+,+2    1+,-2
For the goods market to be in equilibrium, output (the left side of the equation) must 
be equal to the demand for domestic goods (the right side of the equation). The demand 
for domestic goods is equal to consumption, C, plus investment, I, plus government 
spending, G, minus the value of imports, IM>e, plus exports, X.
 
■
Consumption, C, depends positively on disposable income Y-T.
 
■
Investment, I, depends positively on output, Y, and negatively on the real interest 
rate, r.
 
■
Government spending, G, is taken as given.
 
■
The quantity of imports, IM, depends positively on both output, Y, and the real 
exchange rate, e. The value of imports in terms of domestic goods is equal to the 
quantity of imports divided by the real exchange rate.
 
■
Exports, X, depend positively on foreign output, Y*, and negatively on the real 
exchange rate, e.
It will be convenient in what follows to regroup the last two terms under net exports 
(NX), defined as exports minus the value of imports:
NX 1Y, Y *, e2 K X 1Y *, e2 - IM 1Y, e2>e
It follows from our assumptions about imports and exports that net exports, NX, depend 
on domestic output, Y, foreign output, Y*, and the real exchange rate, e. An increase in 
domestic output increases imports, thus decreasing net exports. An increase in foreign 
output increases exports, thus increasing net exports. An increase in the real exchange 
rate leads to a decrease in net exports.
Using this definition of net exports, we can rewrite the equilibrium condition as
 
Y = C1Y - T2 + I1Y, r2 + G + NX 1Y, Y *, e2 
(19.1)
1+2     1+, -2      1-, +, -2
For our purposes, the main implication of equation (19.1) is that both the real inter-
est rate and the real exchange rate affect demand and in turn equilibrium output.
 
■
An increase in the real interest rate leads to a decrease in investment spending and, 
as a result, to a decrease in the demand for domestic goods. This leads, through the 
multiplier, to a decrease in output.
 
■
An increase in the real exchange rate leads to a shift in demand toward foreign goods 
and, as a result, to a decrease in net exports. The decrease in net exports decreases the 
demand for domestic goods. This leads, through the multiplier, to a decrease in output.
For the remainder of the chapter, we shall simplify equation (19.1) in two ways:
 
■
Given our focus on the short run, we assumed in our previous treatment of the IS-LM 
model that the (domestic) price level was given. We shall make the same assumption 
here and extend this assumption to the foreign price level, so the real exchange rate, 
e = EP>P *, and the nominal exchange rate, E, move together. A decrease in the 
nominal exchange rate—a nominal depreciation—leads, one-for-one, to a decrease 
in the real exchange rate—a real depreciation. Conversely, an increase in the nomi-
nal exchange rate—a nominal appreciation—leads, one-for-one, to an increase 
Goods market equilibrium 
(IS): Output = Demand for 
domestic goods.
c
We shall assume,  throughout 
the chapter, that the Marshall-
Lerner condition holds. Under 
this condition, an increase 
in the real exchange rate—a 
real appreciation—leads to a 
decrease in net exports (see 
Chapter 18).
c


=== PAGE 199 ===
 
Chapter 19 
Output, the Interest Rate, and the Exchange Rate 
399
in the real exchange rate—a real appreciation. If, for notational convenience, we 
choose P and P * so that P>P * = 1 (we can do so because both are index numbers), 
then e = E and we can replace e with E in equation (19.1).
 
■
Because we take the domestic price level as given, there is no inflation, either actual or 
expected. Therefore, the nominal interest rate and the real interest rate are the same, and 
we can replace the real interest rate, r, in equation (19.1) with the nominal interest rate, i.
With these two simplifications, equation (19.1) becomes
 
Y = C1Y - T2 + I1Y,  i 2 + G + NX1Y, Y*, E2  
(19.2)
1+2     1+, -2      1-, +, -2
In words: Goods market equilibrium implies that output depends negatively on both 
the nominal interest rate and the nominal exchange rate.
19-2  EQUILIBRIUM IN FINANCIAL MARKETS
When we looked at financial markets in the IS-LM model, we assumed that people chose 
only between two financial assets, money and bonds. Now that we look at a financially 
open economy, we must also take into account the fact that people have a choice between 
domestic bonds and foreign bonds.
Domestic Bonds versus Foreign Bonds
As we look at the choice between domestic and foreign bonds, we shall rely on the 
assumption we introduced in Chapter 17: Financial investors, domestic or foreign, go 
for the highest expected rate of return, ignoring risk. This implies that, in equilibrium, 
both domestic and foreign bonds must have the same expected rate of return; otherwise, 
investors would be willing to hold only one or the other, but not both, and this could not 
be an equilibrium. (Like all economic relations, this relation is only an approximation 
to reality and does not always hold. For more on this, see the Focus Box “Capital Flows, 
Sudden Stops, and the Limits of the Interest Parity Condition.”)
As we saw in Chapter 17 (equation (17.2)), this assumption implies that the follow-
ing arbitrage relation—the interest parity condition—must hold:
 
11 + it2 = 11 + it*2 a Et
Ee
t + 1
b 
(19.3)
where it is the domestic interest rate, it* is the foreign interest rate, Et is the current 
exchange rate, and Ee
t + 1 is the expected future exchange rate. The left side of the equation 
gives the return, in terms of domestic currency, from holding domestic bonds. The right 
side of the equation gives the expected return, also in terms of domestic currency, from 
holding foreign bonds. In equilibrium, the two expected returns must be equal.
Multiply both sides by Ee
t + 1 and reorganize to get
 
Et = 1 + it
1 + it* Ee
t + 1 
(19.4)
For now, we shall take the expected future exchange rate as given and denote it as 
EQ e (we shall relax this assumption in Chapter 20). Under this assumption, and dropping 
time indexes, the interest parity condition becomes
 
E = 1 + i
1 + i* EQ e 
(19.5)
First simplification: 
P = P * = 1,so e = E.
b
Second simplification: 
pe = 0, so r = i.
b
By now you realize that the 
way to understand various 
macroeconomic mecha-
nisms is to refine the basic 
model in one direction and 
simplify it in others (here, 
opening the economy but 
ignoring risk). Keeping all the 
refinements would lead to a 
rich model (and this is what 
macroeconometric models 
do) but would make for a ter-
rible textbook. Things would 
become far too complicated.
b
Remember that we have 
assumed that people only 
hold domestic currency and 
do not hold foreign currency, 
so we do not have to look at 
that choice.
b
The presence of Et comes 
from the fact that to buy the 
foreign bond, you must first 
exchange domestic cur-
rency for foreign currency. 
The presence of Ee
t + 1 comes 
from the fact that to bring 
the funds back next period, 
you will have to exchange 
foreign currency for domestic 
currency.
b


=== PAGE 200 ===
400 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Capital Flows, Sudden Stops, and the Limits  
to the Interest Parity Condition
The interest parity condition assumes that financial inves-
tors care only about expected returns. But as we discussed 
in Chapter 14, investors also care about risk and liquidity. 
Much of the time, one can leave aside these other factors. 
Sometimes, however, they play a big role in investors’ deci-
sions and in determining exchange rate movements. The per-
ception that risk has increased leads investors to want to sell 
most or all the assets they have in a country, no matter what 
the interest rate. These selling episodes, which have affected 
many Latin American and Asian emerging economies in the 
past, are known as sudden stops. During these episodes, 
the interest parity condition fails, and the exchange rate 
of these emerging market countries may fall a lot without 
much change in domestic or foreign interest rates.
The start of the Great Recession was associated with large 
capital movements, which also had little to do with expected 
returns. Worried about uncertainty, many investors from 
advanced countries decided to take their funds home, where 
they felt safer. (Ironically, even though the crisis originated 
from the United States, the United States was still seen as a 
safe haven, leading many investors to sell emerging market 
countries’ assets and buy US assets.) The result was large cap-
ital outflows from several emerging countries. An example is 
given in Figure 1, which shows the net purchases of Brazilian 
equities by foreign investors from 2000 on. Note that the flows 
turned sharply negative in the second half of 2008, going 
from nearly 30% of annual GDP to-25%, only to rebound in 
2009. (Negative net purchases indicate that foreign investors 
sold more stocks than they bought during the quarter.)
The sharp negative flows had major effects on Brazil and 
other emerging market countries, leading to strong downward 
pressure on their exchange rates and serious problems in their 
financial systems. For example, domestic banks that had relied 
on foreign investors for funds found themselves short of funds, 
which forced them to cut lending to domestic firms and house-
holds. This was an important channel of transmission of the 
crisis from the United States to the rest of the world.
Further reading: Among the countries affected by large capital 
outflows in 2008 and 2009 were several small advanced econo-
mies, notably Ireland and Iceland. A number of these countries 
had built up the same financial vulnerabilities as the United 
States (those we studied in Chapter 6) and suffered badly. A good 
and easy read is Michael Lewis’s chapters on Ireland and Iceland 
in Boomerang: Travels in a New Third World (2011, Norton 
Books).
FOCUS
2000-01
2000-11
2001-09
2002-07
2003-05
2004-03
2005-01
2005-11
2006-09
2007-07
2008-05
2009-03
2010-01
2010-11
2011-09
2012-07
2013-05
2014-03
2015-01
2015-11
2016-09
2017-07
220
230
210
0
10
Percent of GDP
20
30
40
50
Figure 1
Net Purchases of Brazilian Equities since 2000
Source: IMF BOP statistics.


=== PAGE 201 ===
 
Chapter 19 
Output, the Interest Rate, and the Exchange Rate 
401
This relation tells us that the current exchange rate depends on the domestic interest 
rate, the foreign interest rate, and the expected future exchange rate.
 
■
An increase in the domestic interest rate leads to an increase in the exchange rate.
 
■
An increase in the foreign interest rate leads to a decrease in the exchange rate.
 
■
An increase in the expected future exchange rate leads to an increase in the current 
exchange rate.
This relation plays a central role in the real world and will play a central role in this 
chapter. Consider the following example:
Think of financial investors—investors, for short—choosing between US bonds 
and Japanese bonds. Suppose that the one-year interest rate on both is 2%. The current 
exchange rate is 100 (one dollar is worth 100 yen), and the expected exchange rate a 
year from now is also 100. Under these assumptions, both US and Japanese bonds have 
the same expected return in dollars, and the interest parity condition holds.
Suppose that investors now expect the exchange rate, for whatever reason, to be 10% 
higher a year from now, so EQ e is now equal to 110. At an unchanged current exchange 
rate, US bonds are now much more attractive than Japanese bonds. Both offer an interest 
rate of 2%, in dollars or yen, but a year from today the yen are now expected to be worth 
10% less in terms of dollars. In terms of dollars, the return on Japanese bonds is therefore 
2% (the interest rate) -10% (the expected depreciation of the yen relative to the dollar), 
or -8%.
What, then, will happen to the current exchange rate? At the initial exchange rate of 
100, investors will want to shift out of Japanese bonds into US bonds. To do so, they must 
first sell Japanese bonds for yen, then sell yen for dollars, and then use the dollars to buy 
US bonds. As investors sell yen and buy dollars, the dollar will appreciate relative to the 
yen. By how much? Equation (19.5) gives the answer: E = 11.02>1.022 110 = 110.
The current exchange rate must increase in the same proportion as the expected future 
exchange rate. Put another way, the dollar must appreciate today by 10%. When it has 
appreciated by 10%, so E = EQ e = 110, the expected returns on US and Japanese bonds 
are again equal, and there is equilibrium in the foreign exchange market.
Suppose instead that the Fed raises the domestic interest rate from 2% to 5%. 
Assume that the Japanese interest rate remains unchanged at 2%, and the expected 
future exchange rate remains unchanged at 100. At an unchanged current exchange 
rate, US bonds are again more attractive than Japanese bonds. US bonds yield a return 
of 5% in dollars. Japanese bonds give a return of 2% in yen, and—because the exchange 
rate is expected to be the same next year as it is today—an expected return of 2% in dol-
lars as well.
Now what will happen to the current exchange rate? Again, at the initial 
exchange rate of 100, investors will want to shift out of Japanese bonds into US bonds. 
As they do so, they sell yen for dollars and the dollar will appreciate. By how much? 
Equation (19.5) gives the answer: E = 11.05>1.022 100 ≈103. The current 
exchange rate will increase by approximately 3%.
Why 3%? Think of what happens when the dollar appreciates. If, as we have 
assumed, investors do not change their expectation of the future exchange rate, then 
the more the dollar appreciates today, the more investors expect it to depreciate in the 
future (as it is expected to return to the same value in the future). When the dollar has 
appreciated by 3% today, investors expect it to depreciate by 3% during the coming year. 
Equivalently, they expect the yen to appreciate relative to the dollar by 3% over the com-
ing year. The expected rate of return in dollars from holding Japanese bonds is there-
fore 2% 1the interest rate in yen2 + 3% (the expected yen appreciation), or 5%. This 
expected rate of return is the same as the rate of return on holding US bonds, so there is 
equilibrium in the foreign exchange market.
An increase in EQ e is an 
expected appreciation of 
the dollar relative to the yen. 
Equivalently, it is an expected 
depreciation of the yen 
 relative to the dollar.
b
Make sure you understand the 
argument. Why doesn’t the 
dollar appreciate by, say, 20%?
b


=== PAGE 202 ===
402 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Note that our argument relies heavily on the assumption that, when the interest rate 
changes, the expected exchange rate remains unchanged. This implies that an apprecia-
tion today leads to an expected depreciation in the future because the exchange rate is 
expected to return to the same, unchanged, value. We shall relax the assumption that 
the expected future exchange rate is fixed in Chapter 20. But the basic conclusion will 
remain: An increase in the domestic interest rate relative to the foreign interest rate leads to an 
appreciation of the domestic currency.
Figure 19-1 plots the relation between the domestic interest rate, i, and the exchange 
rate, E, implied by equation (19.5)—the interest parity relation. The relation is drawn for 
a given expected future exchange rate, EQ e, and a given foreign interest rate, i*, and is rep-
resented by an upward-sloping line. The higher the domestic interest rate, the higher the 
exchange rate. Equation (19.5) also implies that when the domestic interest rate is equal 
to the foreign interest rate 1i = i*2, the exchange rate is equal to the expected future 
exchange rate 1E = EQ e2. This implies that the line corresponding to the interest parity 
condition goes through point A (where i = i*) in the figure.
19-3   PUTTING GOODS AND FINANCIAL 
MARKETS TOGETHER
We now have the elements we need to understand the movements of output, the interest 
rate, and the exchange rate.
Goods market equilibrium implies that output depends, among other factors, on the 
interest rate and the exchange rate:
Y = C1Y - T2 + I1Y, i2 + G + NX1Y, Y *, E2
Let’s think of the interest rate, i, as the policy rate set by the central bank:
i = iQ
And the interest parity condition implies a positive relation between the domestic 
interest rate and the exchange rate:
E = 1 + i
1 + i* EQ e
What happens to the line if 
(1) i* increases? 
(2) EQ eincreases?
c
Domestic interest rate, i
Exchange rate, E
A
i 5 i *
Interest parity relation
given (i*, Ee) 
E e
Figure 19-1
The Relation between 
the Interest Rate and the 
Exchange Rate Implied 
by Interest Parity
A higher domestic interest rate 
leads to a higher exchange 
rate—an appreciation.


=== PAGE 203 ===
 
Chapter 19 
Output, the Interest Rate, and the Exchange Rate 
403
Together, these three relations determine output, the interest rate, and the exchange 
rate. Working with three equations and three variables is not easy. But we can easily 
reduce them to two by using the interest parity condition to eliminate the exchange rate 
in the goods market equilibrium relation. Doing this gives us the following two equations, 
the open economy versions of the IS and LM relations:
IS  : Y = C1Y - T2 + I1Y, i2 + G + NX aY, Y *, 1 + i
1 + i* EQ eb
LM  : i = iQ
Together, the two equations determine the interest rate and equilibrium output. 
Using equation (19.5) then gives us the implied exchange rate. Take the IS relation first 
and consider the effects of an increase in the interest rate on output. An increase in the 
interest rate now has two effects:
 
■
The first effect, which was already present in a closed economy, is the direct effect on 
investment. A higher interest rate leads to a decrease in investment, a decrease in the 
demand for domestic goods, and a decrease in output.
 
■
The second effect, which is present in the open economy, is the effect through the 
exchange rate. A higher interest rate leads to an increase in the exchange rate—an 
appreciation. The appreciation, which makes domestic goods more expensive rela-
tive to foreign goods, leads to a decrease in net exports, and therefore a decrease in 
the demand for domestic goods and a decrease in output.
Both effects work in the same direction. An increase in the interest rate decreases 
demand directly and indirectly—through the adverse effect of the appreciation on 
demand.
The IS relation between the interest rate and output is drawn in Figure 19-2(a), for 
given values of all the other variables in the relation—T, G, Y *, i*,and EQ e. The IS curve 
is downward sloping: An increase in the interest rate leads to lower output. The curve 
looks much the same as in the closed economy, but it hides a more complex relation than 
before. The interest rate affects output not only directly but also indirectly through the 
exchange rate.
The LM relation is the same as in the closed economy: it is a horizontal line, at the 
level of the interest rate iQ set by the central bank.
An increase in the  interest 
rate leads, both directly 
and indirectly (through the 
exchange rate), to a decrease 
in output.
b
Exchange rate, E
Y
E
LM
Output, Y
A
(a)
(b)
B
IS
Domestic interest rate, i
Domestic interest rate, i
Interest parity
relation given
(i *, Ee) 
i
i
Figure 19-2
The IS-LM Model in an 
Open Economy
An increase in the interest rate 
reduces output both directly 
and indirectly (through the 
exchange rate). The IS curve 
is downward sloping, for both 
reasons. The LM curve is hor-
izontal, as in Chapter 6.


=== PAGE 204 ===
404 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Equilibrium in the goods and financial markets is attained at point A in Figure 19-2(a), 
with output level Y and interest rate iQ. The equilibrium value of the exchange rate cannot 
be read directly from the graph. But it is easily obtained from Figure 19-2(b), which repli-
cates Figure 19-1 and gives the exchange rate associated with a given interest rate found at 
point B, given the foreign interest rate i* and the expected exchange rate. The exchange rate 
associated with the equilibrium interest rate iQ is equal to E.
Let’s summarize. We have derived the IS and LM relations for an open economy:
The IS curve is downward sloping. An increase in the interest rate leads both directly 
and indirectly (through the exchange rate) to a decrease in demand and a decrease in 
output.
The LM curve is horizontal at the interest rate set by the central bank.
Equilibrium output and the equilibrium interest rate are given by the intersection of 
the IS and LM curves. Given the foreign interest rate and the expected future exchange 
rate, the equilibrium interest rate determines the equilibrium exchange rate.
19-4   THE EFFECTS OF POLICY IN AN 
OPEN ECONOMY
Having derived the IS-LM model for the open economy, we can now put it to use and look 
at the effects of monetary and fiscal policy.
The Effects of Monetary Policy in an Open Economy
Let’s start from the effects of the central bank’s decision to increase the domestic interest 
rate. Look at Figure 19-3(a). At a given level of output, with a higher interest rate, the LM 
curve shifts up, from LM to LM¿. The IS curve does not shift (remember that the IS curve 
shifts only if G or T or Y * or i* change). The equilibrium moves from point A to point A¿. In 
Figure 19-3(b), the increase in the interest rate leads to an appreciation.
So, in an open economy, monetary policy works through two channels: First, as in 
the closed economy, it works through the effect of the interest rate on spending; second, 
it works through the effect of the interest rate on the exchange rate and the effect of the 
exchange rate on exports and imports. Both effects work in the same direction. In the 
case of a monetary contraction, the higher interest rate and the appreciation decrease 
both demand and output.
A monetary contraction shifts 
the LM curve up. It shifts 
neither the IS curve nor the 
interest parity curve.
c
Can you tell what happens to 
net exports? (The answer is no: 
They can go either way. Make 
sure you understand why.) c
Domestic interest rate, i
Domestic interest rate, i
IS
Y
E
Exchange rate, E
Output, Y
(a)
(b)
LM
A
A
Interest parity relation
given (i*, Ee) 
Y
A
i
i
i
i
A
LM
E
Figure 19-3
The Effects of an Increase 
in the Interest Rate
An increase in the interest 
rate leads to a decrease in 
output and an appreciation.


=== PAGE 205 ===
 
Chapter 19 
Output, the Interest Rate, and the Exchange Rate 
405
The Effects of Fiscal Policy in an Open Economy
Let’s look now at a change in government spending. Suppose that, starting from a bal-
anced budget, the government decides to increase defense spending without raising taxes 
and so runs a budget deficit. What happens to the level of output? To the composition of 
output? To the interest rate? To the exchange rate?
Let us first assume that before the increase in government spending, the level of out 
put, Y, was below potential. If the increase in G moves output toward potential, but not above 
 potential, the central bank will not be worried that inflation might increase (remember our dis-
cussion in Chapter 9, particularly Figure 9-2 and will keep the interest rate unchanged. What 
happens to the economy is described in Figure 19-4. The economy is initially at point A. The 
increase in government spending, ∆G 7 0,increases output at a given interest rate, shifting 
the IS curve to the right, from IS to IS¿ in Figure 19-4(a). Because the central bank does not 
change the policy rate, the LM curve does not shift. The new equilibrium is at point A¿, with a 
higher level of output, Y′. In panel (b), because the interest rate has not changed, neither has 
the exchange rate. So an increase in government spending, when the central bank keeps the 
interest rate unchanged, leads to an increase in output with no change in the exchange rate.
Can we tell what happens to the various components of demand?
 
■
Clearly, both consumption and government spending increase: Consumption goes 
up because of the increase in income; government spending goes up by assumption.
 
■
Investment also rises because it depends on both output and the interest rate: I = I1Y, i2.
Here output rises and the interest rate does not change, thus investment rises.
 
■
What about net exports? Recall that net exports depend on domestic output, foreign out-
put, and the exchange rate: NX = NX1Y, Y *, E2. Foreign output is unchanged, as we 
are assuming that the rest of the world does not respond to the increase in domestic gov-
ernment spending. The exchange rate is also unchanged, because the interest rate does 
not change. We are left with the effect of higher domestic output; as the increase in out-
put increases imports at an unchanged exchange rate, net exports decrease. As a result, 
the budget deficit leads to a deterioration of the trade balance. If trade was balanced to 
start, then the budget deficit leads to a trade deficit. Note that, although an increase in 
the budget deficit increases the trade deficit, the effect is far from mechanical. It works 
through the effect of the budget deficit on output and, in turn, on the trade deficit.
Now assume instead that the increase in G happens in an economy where output 
is close to potential output, Yn. The government could decide to increase government 
spending even if the economy is already at potential output because, for example, it 
An increase in government 
spending shifts the IS curve 
to the right. It shifts neither 
the LM curve nor the interest 
parity line.
b
Interest parity relation
given (i *, Ee) 
E e
Y
∆G > 0
Domestic interest rate, i
A
Y
Exchange rate, E
Output, Y
(a)
(b)
IS
LM
A
A
IS
Domestic interest rate, i
Figure 19-4
The Effects of an Increase 
in Government Spending 
with an Unchanged 
Interest Rate
An increase in government 
spending leads to an increase 
in output. If the central 
bank keeps the interest rate 
unchanged, the exchange 
rate also remains unchanged.


=== PAGE 206 ===
406 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
needs to pay for an exceptional event, such as a big flood, and wants to postpone tax 
increases. Or it could do it for political reasons, because it wants to increase spending but 
does not want to increase taxes (more on this in Chapter 22). In this case the central bank 
will worry that the increase in G, by moving the economy above potential output, might 
push inflation up. It is likely to respond by raising the interest rate. What happens then 
is described in Figure 19-5. At an unchanged interest rate, output would increase from 
Yn to Y′ and the exchange rate would not change. But if the central bank accompanies 
the increase in government spending with an increase in the interest rate, output will 
increase by less, from Yn to Y″, and the exchange rate will appreciate, from E to E″.
Again, can we tell what happens to the various components of demand?
 
■
As before, both consumption and government spending increase: consumption 
goes up because of the increase in income, and government spending goes up by 
assumption.
 
■
What happens to investment is now ambiguous. Investment depends on both output 
and the interest rate: I = I1Y, i2. Here output rises, but so does the interest rate.
 
■
Net exports decrease for two reasons: Output goes up, increasing imports; the exchange 
rate appreciates, increasing imports and decreasing exports. The budget deficit leads 
to a trade deficit. (Whether, however, the trade deficit is larger than if the policy rate 
remained constant is ambiguous. The appreciation makes it worse, but the higher inter-
est rate leads to a smaller increase in output and thus a smaller increase in imports.)
This version of the IS-LM model for the open economy was first put together in the 
1960s by the two economists I mentioned at the outset of the chapter, Robert Mundell, at 
Columbia University, and Marcus Fleming, at the International Monetary Fund—although 
their model reflected the economies of the 1960s, when central banks used to set the sup-
ply of money, M, rather than the interest rate as they do today (remember our discussions 
in Chapters 4 and 6), so their model was slightly different from the model presented here.
How well does the Mundell-Fleming model fit the facts? Typically, quite well, and this is 
why it is still in use. Like all simple models, it often needs to be extended. One can incorporate, 
for example, the role of risk in affecting portfolio decisions, or the implications of the zero 
lower bound, two important aspects of the financial crisis. But the simple exercises we worked 
through in Figures 19-3, 19-4, and 19-5 are a good starting point to organize thoughts. How 
the model can be used to interpret events or think about policy is shown in two Focus Boxes. 
The first looks at the effects of the combination of monetary contraction and fiscal expansion 
that took place in the United States in the early 1980s. The second looks at whether we can 
expect the trade tariffs introduced by the Trump administration to reduce the trade deficit.
Yn
Exchange rate, E
Output, Y
(a)
(b)
IS
A
A
Domestic interest rate, i
Domestic interest rate, i
LM
∆G > 0
E
Y
Y
A
A
A
LM
IS
E
Figure 19-5
The Effects of an Increase 
in Government Spending 
When the Central Bank 
Responds by Raising the 
Interest Rate
An increase in government 
spending leads to an increase 
in output. If the central bank 
responds by raising the inter-
est rate, the exchange rate 
will appreciate.
Robert Mundell was 
awarded the Nobel Prize in 
Economics in 1999. c


=== PAGE 207 ===
 
Chapter 19 
Output, the Interest Rate, and the Exchange Rate 
407
Monetary Contraction and Fiscal Expansion: 
The United States in the Early 1980s
The early 1980s in the United States were dominated by 
sharp changes in both monetary policy and in fiscal policy.
In the late 1970s, the Chairman of the Fed, Paul Volcker, 
concluded that US inflation was too high and had to be 
reduced. Starting in late 1979, he embarked on a path of sharp 
increases in interest rates, realizing this might lead to a reces-
sion in the short run but lower inflation in the medium run.
The change in fiscal policy was triggered by the election 
of Ronald Reagan in 1980. Reagan was elected on the prom-
ise of more conservative policies, namely lower taxation and 
a scaling back of the government’s role in economic activity. 
This commitment led to the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 
August 1981. Personal income taxes were cut by a total of 
23% in three installments from 1981 to 1983. Corporate taxes 
were also reduced. These tax cuts were not, however, accom-
panied by corresponding decreases in government spending, 
and the result was a steady increase in budget deficits
What were the Reagan administration’s motivations for 
cutting taxes without implementing corresponding cuts in 
spending? These are still being debated, but there is agree-
ment that there were two main motivations:
One motivation came from the beliefs of a fringe, but 
influential, group of economists called the supply siders, 
who argued that a cut in tax rates would cause people and 
firms to work much harder and more productively, and that 
the resulting increase in activity would actually lead to an 
increase, not a decrease, in tax revenues. Using the termi-
nology of this textbook: They thought that potential output 
would substantially increase, actual output would follow, 
and tax revenues would increase. Whatever the merits of 
the argument appeared to be then, it proved wrong. Even 
if some people did work harder and more productively after 
the tax cuts, tax revenues decreased and the fiscal deficit 
increased.
The other motivation was more cynical. It was a bet that 
the cut in taxes, and the resulting increase in deficits, would 
scare Congress into cutting spending or, at the least, into not 
increasing spending—a strategy known as “starve the beast.” 
This motivation turned out to be partly right: Congress found 
itself under enormous pressure not to increase spending, and 
the growth of spending in the 1980s was surely lower than 
it would have been otherwise. Nonetheless, the adjustment 
of spending was not enough to offset the shortfall in tax rev-
enues and avoid the rapid increase in deficits.
Whatever the reason for the deficits, the combined effects 
of higher interest rates and a fiscal expansion were very 
much in line with what the Mundell-Fleming model predicts. 
Table 1 shows the evolution of the main macroeconomic 
variables from 1980 to 1984.
From 1980 to 1982, the evolution of the economy was dom-
inated by the effects of the increase in interest rates, both nomi-
nal and real. They increased sharply, leading to both a large dol-
lar appreciation and a recession. The goal of lowering inflation 
was achieved; by 1982, inflation was down to about 4%, down 
from 12.5% in 1980. Lower output and the dollar appreciation 
had opposing effects on the trade balance (lower output leading 
to lower imports and an improvement in the trade balance; the 
appreciation of the dollar leading to a deterioration in the trade 
balance), resulting in little change in the trade deficit until 1983.
From 1983 on, the evolution of the economy was dominated 
by the effects of the fiscal expansion. As our model predicts, these 
effects were strong output growth, high interest rates, and further 
dollar appreciation. High output growth and the dollar appre-
ciation led to an increase in the trade deficit to 2.7% of GDP by 
1984. By the mid-1980s, the main macroeconomic policy issue 
had become that of the twin deficits: the budget deficit and the 
trade deficit. The twin deficits were to remain a central macroeco-
nomic concern throughout the 1980s and early 1990s.
FOCUS
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
GDP growth (%)
-0.5
1.8
-2.2
3.9
6.2
Unemployment rate (%)
7.1
7.6
9.7
9.6
7.5
Inflation (CPI) (%)
12.5
8.9
3.8
3.8
3.9
Nominal interest rate (%)
11.5
14.0
10.6
8.6
9.6
Real interest rate (%)
2.5
4.9
6.0
5.1
5.9
Real exchange rate
85
101
111
117
129
Trade surplus (% of GDP)
-0.5
-0.4
-0.6
-1.5
-2.7
Inflation: rate of change of the CPI. The nominal interest rate is the three-month T-bill rate. The real interest rate is equal to the 
nominal rate minus the forecast of inflation by DRI, a private forecasting firm. The real exchange rate is the trade-weighted real 
exchange rate, normalized so that 1973 = 100. A negative trade surplus is a trade deficit.
Table 1 
Major US Macroeconomic Variables, 1980–1984


=== PAGE 208 ===
408 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
US Trade Deficits and Trump Administration 
Trade Tariffs
One of the themes of President Trump’s 2016 campaign was 
that the US trade deficit, which stood at 2.7% of GDP at the 
time, had to be reduced. He saw the trade deficit as an indica-
tion that foreign countries, China in particular, were taking 
advantage of the United States. In 2018, following up on this 
promise, the Trump administration increased tariffs on solar 
panels, then on steel and aluminum imports, and then on a 
range of Chinese goods.
Most economists disagreed with both the diagnosis and 
the method.
About the diagnosis: Most economists saw the trade 
deficits as reflecting chronically low US saving relative to 
investment, together with the willingness of foreigners to 
lend to the United States, allowing for the deficits to be eas-
ily financed through foreign borrowing. Thus, they argued, 
trade deficits reflected a US problem and had to be solved by 
increasing domestic saving, private or public. Some econo-
mists went further and argued that the origin of the trade 
deficit was actually the attractiveness of US assets. Foreigners 
were eager to hold US assets, and this foreign demand led to 
dollar appreciation, decreasing in turn the relative competi-
tiveness of US goods and leading to the trade deficit. (You 
may want to return to the discussion of the relation between 
trade deficits, saving, and investment in Section 18-5.) Thus, 
these economists argued, the trade deficit reflected the finan-
cial strength of the United States and was not particularly 
worrisome.
About the method: Economists argued that, if the origin 
of the trade deficit lay in low US saving or in the attractive-
ness of US assets, tariffs were unlikely to work. Let’s see why.
At a given exchange rate, an increase in tariffs increases 
the price of imports for US consumers. How much depends 
on what foreign firms do in reaction to the tariff:
They can decrease their pre-tariff price, in which case 
the price facing US consumers increases by less than the 
tariff. They can even decrease the pre-tariff price enough 
that the price facing US consumers does not change. In this 
case, the volume of imports may not change, but how much 
the United States pays for imports (the pre-tariff price) goes 
down, so the value of imports in terms of domestic goods 
decreases.
Or they can instead keep the same pre-tariff price, in 
which case the price facing US consumers increases by the 
increase in the tariff, and the demand for imports is then 
likely to decrease. In this case, the price that the United 
States pays for imports does not change, but the volume of 
imports decreases, leading again to a decrease in the value 
of imports.
In both cases, at a given nominal exchange rate, the 
value of imports in terms of domestic goods decreases. Given 
exports, this implies a smaller trade deficit. (There is a differ-
ence, however, in terms of who pays for the tariffs. In the first 
case, the foreign firms pay; in the second case, the US con-
sumers pay.) The smaller trade deficit leads to an increase in 
demand and an increase in output. It all seems to work. So 
why were the economists skeptical that the tariffs would not 
reduce the trade deficit?
For four reasons:
 
■
To the extent that it triggered a tariff war, and other 
countries responded by raising tariffs on US goods, US 
exports might decrease in line with the decrease in US 
imports, leading to no change in the trade deficit. And, 
indeed, in response to US tariffs, China increased tariffs 
on US goods in late 2018.
 
■
To the extent that the US economy was close to poten-
tial, as was indeed the case in 2018, an increase in out-
put might lead to overheating and thus force the Fed to 
increase the interest rate. This in turn would lead to a 
dollar appreciation (remember the interest parity con-
dition), partially cancelling the effects of the tariffs on 
net exports.
 
■
Even if the Fed did not increase the interest rate, expec-
tations of a lower trade deficit and thus a smaller need 
for foreign borrowing, now and in the future, may lead 
to an appreciation of the dollar, again partially offset-
ting the effects of the tariffs on net exports.
 
■
Finally, while it was increasing tariffs, the Trump 
administration also implemented a tax reform passed in 
2017, which led to a large increase in the fiscal deficit in 
2018. As we saw in this chapter, a larger fiscal deficit is 
likely to lead to a larger trade deficit: If the Fed did not 
intervene, the fiscal deficit would lead to larger output 
and higher imports. If the Fed intervened to limit the 
increase in output, the increase in interest rates would 
lead to a dollar appreciation, and, again, to a larger 
trade deficit. In either case, fiscal policy was likely to 
offset or even dominate the effects of tariffs on the trade 
balance.
What happened? At the time of writing, it is too early to 
draw strong conclusions. Trade negotiations are still going 
on. It takes time for exporters and importers to react to tariffs 
and exchange rate movements. So far, however, the evidence 
is on the side of the economists. This is shown in Figure 1, 
which plots the evolution of the ratio of net exports to GDP 
and of the real exchange rate (normalized to 100 in 2010), 
quarterly, since 2010.
The shaded area corresponds to the four quarters of 
2018. Since the beginning of 2018, the real exchange 
rate (left-hand vertical axis) has increased by close to 9%. 
FOCUS


=== PAGE 209 ===
 
Chapter 19 
Output, the Interest Rate, and the Exchange Rate 
409
24.0
23.8
23.6
23.4
23.2
23.0
22.8
22.6
22.4
22.2
22.0
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
2018
Real multilateral exchange rate
Net exports/GDP
2010-01
2011-01
2012-01
2013-01
2014-01
2015-01
2016-01
2017-01
2018-01
Figure 1
Net exports/GDP and the real multilateral exchange rate since 2010
Source: FRED: NETEXP, GDP, RBUSBIS
The  trade deficit (right-hand vertical axis) is roughly the 
same as it was at the beginning of 2018, around 3% of GDP. 
For the moment, things have not moved in the direction the 
Trump administration hoped for. (What would you do if you 
wanted to reduce the US trade deficit while keeping output 
at potential?)
19-5   FIXED EXCHANGE RATES
We have assumed so far that the central bank chose the interest rate and let the exchange 
rate adjust freely in whatever manner was implied by equilibrium in the foreign exchange 
market. In many countries, this assumption does not reflect reality. Central banks act 
under implicit or explicit exchange rate targets and use monetary policy to achieve those 
targets. The targets are sometimes implicit, sometimes explicit; they are sometimes spe-
cific values, sometimes bands or ranges. These exchange rate arrangements (or regimes, 
as they are called) come under many names. Let’s first see what the names mean.
Pegs, Crawling Pegs, Bands, the EMS, and the Euro
At one end of the spectrum are countries with flexible exchange rates such as the 
United States, the United Kingdom, Japan, and Canada. These countries have no explicit 
exchange rate targets. Although their central banks do not ignore movements in the 
exchange rate, they have shown themselves quite willing to let their exchange rates fluc-
tuate considerably.
At the other end are countries that operate under fixed exchange rates. They maintain 
a fixed exchange rate in terms of some foreign currency. Some peg their currency to the 
dollar. For example, from 1991 to 2001, Argentina pegged its currency, the peso, at the 
highly symbolic exchange rate of one dollar for one peso (more on this in Chapter 20). 
Other countries used to peg their currency to the French franc (most of these are former 
French colonies in Africa); as the French franc has been replaced by the euro, they are 
now pegged to the euro. Still other countries peg their currency to a basket of foreign cur-
rencies, with the weights reflecting the composition of their trade.


=== PAGE 210 ===
410 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
The label fixed is a bit misleading. It is not the case that the exchange rate in countries 
with a fixed exchange rate never actually changes. But changes are rare. An extreme 
case is that of the African countries pegged to the French franc. When their exchange 
rates were readjusted in January 1994, it was the first adjustment in 45 years! Because 
these changes are rare, economists use specific words to distinguish them from the daily 
changes that occur under flexible exchange rates. A decrease in the exchange rate under 
a regime of fixed exchange rates is called a devaluation rather than a depreciation, and an 
increase in the exchange rate under a regime of fixed exchange rates is called a revalua-
tion rather than an appreciation.
Between these extremes are countries with various degrees of commitment to an 
exchange rate target. For example, some countries operate under a crawling peg. The 
name describes it well. These countries typically have inflation rates that exceed the US 
inflation rate. If they were to peg their nominal exchange rate against the dollar, the more 
rapid increase in their domestic price level above the US price level would lead to a steady 
real appreciation and rapidly make their goods uncompetitive. To avoid this effect, these 
countries choose a predetermined rate of depreciation against the dollar: They choose to 
“crawl” (move slowly) vis-à-vis the dollar.
Yet another arrangement is for a group of countries to maintain their bilateral 
exchange rates (the exchange rate between each pair of countries) within some bands. 
Perhaps the most prominent example was the European Monetary System (EMS), 
which determined the movements of exchange rates in the European Union from 1978 
to 1998. Under the EMS rules, member countries agreed to maintain their exchange rate 
relative to the other currencies in the system within narrow limits or bands around a 
central parity—a given value for the exchange rate. Changes in the central parity and 
devaluations or revaluations of specific  currencies could occur, but only by common 
agreement among member countries. After a major crisis in 1992, which led several 
countries to drop out of the EMS, exchange rate adjustments became more and more 
infrequent, leading a number of countries to move one step further and adopt a com-
mon currency, the euro. The conversion from domestic currencies to the euro began on 
January 1, 1999, and was completed in early 2002. We shall return to the implications 
of the move to the euro in Chapter 20.
We shall discuss the pros and cons of different exchange regimes in the next chapter. 
But first, we must understand how pegging (also called fixing) the exchange rate affects 
monetary policy and fiscal policy. This is what we do in the rest of this section.
Monetary Policy When the Exchange Rate Is Fixed
Suppose a country decides to peg its exchange rate at some chosen value; call it EQ. How 
does it achieve this? The government cannot just announce the value of the exchange rate 
and remain idle. Rather, it must take measures so that its chosen exchange rate will prevail 
in the foreign exchange market. Let’s look at the implications and mechanics of pegging.
Pegging or no pegging, the exchange rate and the nominal interest rate must satisfy 
the interest parity condition
11 + it2 = 11 + it*2 a Et
Ee
t + 1
b
When the country pegs its exchange rate at EQ, the current exchange rate Et = EQ. 
If financial and foreign exchange markets believe that the exchange rate will remain 
pegged at this value, then their expectation of the future exchange rate, Ee
t + 1,is also equal 
to EQ, and the interest parity relation becomes
11 + it2 = 11 + it*2 1 it = it*
These terms were 
 introduced in Chapter 17.
c
Recall the definition of the real 
exchange rate e = EP>P *.
If domestic inflation is 
higher than foreign inflation:
P increases faster than P *.
If E is fixed, EP>P * steadily 
increases.
We shall look at the 1992 
crisis in Chapter 20.
c
You can think of countries 
adopting a common currency 
as adopting an extreme form 
of fixed exchange rates. Their 
“exchange rate” is fixed at 
one-to-one between any pair 
of countries.
c


=== PAGE 211 ===
 
Chapter 19 
Output, the Interest Rate, and the Exchange Rate 
411
In words: If financial investors expect the exchange rate to remain unchanged, they 
will require the same nominal interest rate in both countries. Under a fixed exchange rate 
and perfect capital mobility, the domestic interest rate must be equal to the interest rate of the 
foreign country the country is pegging to.
Let’s summarize. Under fixed exchange rates, the central bank gives up monetary policy as 
a policy instrument. With a fixed exchange rate, the domestic interest rate must be equal 
to the foreign interest rate.
Fiscal Policy When the Exchange Rate Is Fixed
If monetary policy can no longer be used under fixed exchange rates, what about fiscal 
policy?
The effects of an increase in government spending when the central bank pegs the 
exchange rate are identical to those we saw in Figure 19-4 for the case of flexible exchange 
rates and an unchanged monetary policy. This is because, under flexible exchange rates, if 
the increase in spending, is not accompanied by a change in the interest rate, the exchange 
rate doesn’t move. Thus, when government spending increases, it makes no difference 
whether the country pegs its exchange rate. The difference between fixed and flexible 
exchange is the ability of the central bank to respond. We saw in Figure 19-5 that if the 
increase in government spending pushed the economy above potential output, thus rais-
ing the possibility that inflation might increase, the central bank could respond by raising 
the interest rate. This option is no longer available under fixed exchange rates because the 
interest rate must be equal to the foreign rate.
As this chapter comes to an end, a question should have started to form in your 
mind: Why would a country choose to fix its exchange rate? You have seen several rea-
sons why this appears to be a bad idea:
 
■
By fixing the exchange rate, a country gives up a powerful tool for correcting trade 
imbalances or changing the level of economic activity.
 
■
By committing to a given exchange rate, a country also gives up control of its interest 
rate. Not only that, but the country must match movements in the foreign inter-
est rate, at the risk of unwanted effects on its own activity. This is what happened 
in the early 1990s in Europe. Because of the increase in demand as a result of the 
reunification of West and East Germany, Germany felt it had to increase its inter-
est rate. To maintain their parity with the Deutsche Mark, other countries in the 
European Monetary System (EMS) were forced to increase their interest rates, some-
thing they would rather have avoided. (This is the topic of the Focus Box “German 
Reunification, Interest Rates, and the EMS.”)
 
■
Although the country retains control of fiscal policy, one policy instrument may 
not be enough. As you saw in Chapter 18, a fiscal expansion can help the economy 
get out of a recession, but only at the cost of a larger trade deficit. And a coun-
try that wants, for example, to decrease its budget deficit cannot, under a fixed 
exchange rate, use monetary policy to offset the contractionary effect of its fiscal 
policy on output.
Why, then, do some countries fix their exchange rate? Why have 19 European 
 countries—with perhaps more to come—adopted a common currency? To answer these 
questions, we must do some more work. We must look at what happens not only in the 
short run—which is what we did in this chapter—but also in the medium run, when 
the price level can adjust. And we must look at the nature of exchange rate crises. Once 
we have done this, we shall be able to assess the pros and cons of different exchange rate 
regimes. These are the topics we take up in Chapter 20.
These results depend on the 
interest rate parity condition, 
which in turn depends on the 
assumption of perfect capi-
tal mobility—that financial 
investors go for the highest 
expected rate of return. The 
case of fixed exchange rates 
with imperfect capital mobil-
ity, which is more relevant 
for middle-income coun-
tries such as those in Latin 
America or Asia, is treated in 
the appendix to this chapter.
b
Under flexible exchange rates 
the central bank can respond 
to an increase in government 
spending by raising the inter-
est rate, as in Figure 19-5. 
This option is not available 
under fixed exchange rates 
because the interest rate must 
be equal to the foreign rate.
b


=== PAGE 212 ===
412 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
FOCUS
German Reunification, Interest Rates, and the EMS
Under a fixed exchange rate regime such as the European 
Monetary System (EMS)—the system that prevailed before 
the introduction of the euro—no individual country can 
change its interest rate if the other countries do not change 
theirs as well. How, then, do interest rates actually change? 
Two arrangements are possible. One is for all the member 
countries to coordinate changes in their interest rates. The 
other is for one of the countries to take the lead and for the 
other countries to follow—this is in effect what happened in 
the EMS, with Germany as the leader.
During the 1980s, most European central banks shared 
similar goals and were happy to let the Bundesbank (the German 
central bank) take the lead. But in 1990, German unification led 
to a sharp divergence in goals between the Bundesbank and the 
central banks of the other EMS countries. Large budget deficits 
triggered by transfers to people and firms in Eastern Germany, 
together with an investment boom, led to a large increase in 
demand in Germany. The Bundesbank’s fear that this shift would 
generate too strong an increase in activity led it to adopt a restric-
tive monetary policy. The result was strong growth in Germany 
together with a large increase in interest rates.
This may have been the right policy mix for Germany, but 
for the other European countries, it was much less appealing. 
They were not experiencing the same increase in demand, 
but to stay in the EMS they had to match German interest 
rates. The net result was a sharp decrease in demand and 
output in the other countries. These results are presented 
in Table 1, which gives nominal interest rates, real interest 
rates, inflation rates, and GDP growth from 1990 to 1992 for 
Germany and two of its EMS partners, France and Belgium.
Note first that the high German nominal interest 
rates were matched by both France and Belgium. In fact, 
nominal interest rates were actually higher in France than 
in Germany in all three years! This is because France needed 
higher interest rates than Germany to maintain the Deutsche 
Mark (DM)/franc parity: Worried about a possible devalua-
tion of the franc, financial investors required a higher inter-
est rate on French bonds than on German bonds (more on 
this in the Focus Box on the EMS crisis in Chapter 20).
Although France and Belgium had to match—or, as we 
have just seen, more than match—German nominal rates, 
both countries had less inflation than Germany. The result 
was very high real interest rates, much higher than the rate 
in Germany: In both France and Belgium, average real inter-
est rates from 1990 to 1992 were close to 7%. And in both 
countries, the period 1990–1992 was characterized by slow 
growth and rising unemployment. In France unemployment 
in 1992 was 10.4%, up from 8.9% in 1990; the correspond-
ing numbers for Belgium were 12.1% and 8.7%.
A similar story was unfolding in the other EMS countries. 
By 1992, average unemployment in the European Union, 
which had been 8.7% in 1990, had increased to 10.3%. The 
effects of high real interest rates on spending were not the 
only source of this slowdown, but they were the main one.
By 1992, an increasing number of countries were won-
dering whether to keep defending their EMS parity or to give 
it up and lower their interest rates. Worried about the risk 
of devaluations, financial markets started to ask for higher 
interest rates in countries where they thought devaluations 
were more likely. The result was two major exchange rate cri-
ses, one in the fall of 1992 and the other in the summer of 
1993. By the end of these two crises, two countries, Italy and 
the United Kingdom, had left the EMS. We shall look at these 
crises, their origins, and their implications in Chapter 20.
Nominal Interest Rates (%)
Inflation (%)
1990
1991
1992
1990
1991
1992
Germany
8.5
9.2
9.5
2.7
3.7
4.7
France
10.3
9.6
10.3
2.9
3.0
2.4
Belgium
9.6
9.4
9.4
2.9
2.7
2.4
Real Interest Rates (%)
GDP Growth (%)
1990
1991
1992
1990
1991
1992
Germany
5.8
5.5
4.8
5.7
4.5
2.1
France
7.4
6.6
7.9
2.5
0.7
1.4
Belgium
6.7
6.7
7.0
3.3
2.1
0.8
The nominal interest rate is the short-term nominal interest rate. The real interest rate is the realized real interest rate 
over the year—that is, the nominal interest rate minus actual inflation over the year. All rates are annual.
Source: OECD Economic Outlook.
Table 1 
 Interest Rates, Inflation, and Output Growth after German Reunification: 
Germany, France, and Belgium, 1990–1992


=== PAGE 213 ===
 
Chapter 19 
Output, the Interest Rate, and the Exchange Rate 
413
SUMMARY
 
■In an open economy, the demand for domestic goods, and 
in turn output, depends on both the interest rate and the 
exchange rate. An increase in the interest rate decreases the 
demand for domestic goods. An increase in the exchange 
rate—an appreciation—also decreases the demand for 
domestic goods.
 
■The exchange rate is determined by the interest parity condi-
tion, which states that domestic and foreign bonds must have 
the same expected rate of return in terms of domestic currency.
 
■Given the expected future exchange rate and the foreign 
interest rate, increases in the domestic interest rate lead 
to an increase in the exchange rate—an appreciation. 
Decreases in the domestic interest rate lead to a decrease in 
the exchange rate—a depreciation.
 
■Under flexible exchange rates, an expansionary fiscal policy 
leads to an increase in output. If the fiscal expansion is par-
tially offset by tighter monetary policy, it leads to an increase 
in the interest rate and an appreciation.
 
■Under flexible exchange rates, a contractionary monetary 
policy leads to a decrease in output, an increase in the inter-
est rate, and an appreciation.
 
■There are many types of exchange rate arrangements: 
fully flexible exchange rates, crawling pegs, fixed exchange 
rates (or pegs), or the adoption of a common currency. 
Under fixed exchange rates, a country maintains a fixed 
exchange rate in terms of a foreign currency or a basket of 
currencies.
 
■Under fixed exchange rates and the interest parity condi-
tion, a country must maintain an interest rate equal to 
the foreign interest rate. The central bank loses the use 
of  monetary policy as a policy instrument. Fiscal policy 
becomes potentially more powerful than under flex-
ible exchange rates, because fiscal policy requires mon-
etary accommodation, and so does not lead to offsetting 
changes in the domestic interest rate and exchange rate.
KEY TERMS
Mundell-Fleming model, 397
sudden stops, 400
safe haven, 400
supply siders, 407
twin deficits, 407
peg, 409
crawling peg, 410
European Monetary System (EMS), 410
bands, 410
central parity, 410
euro, 410
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using the information in this chapter, label each of the following 
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. The interest rate parity condition means that interest rates 
are equal across countries.
b. Other things being equal, the interest parity condition 
implies that the domestic currency will appreciate in 
response to an increase in the expected exchange rate.
c. If financial investors expect the dollar to depreciate against 
the yen over the coming year, one-year interest rates will be 
higher in the United States than in Japan.
d. If the expected exchange rate appreciates, the current 
exchange rate immediately appreciates.
e. The central bank influences the value of the exchange rate 
by changing the domestic interest rate relative to the for-
eign interest rate.
f. An increase in domestic interest rates, all other factors 
equal, increases exports.
g. A fiscal expansion, all other factors equal, tends to increase 
net exports.
h. Fiscal policy has a greater effect on output in an economy 
with fixed exchange rates than in an economy with flexible 
exchange rates.
i. Under a fixed exchange rate, the central bank must keep 
the domestic interest rate equal to the foreign interest rates.
j. One important issue with increasing tariffs on imports into 
your country as a way of reducing your trade deficit is that 
other countries may retaliate by increasing their tariffs on 
your exports (their imports).
2. Consider an open economy with flexible exchange rates. Suppose 
output is at the natural level, but there is a trade deficit. The goal of 
policy is to reduce the trade deficit and leave the level of output at its 
natural level.
What is the appropriate fiscal and monetary policy mix?
3. In this chapter, we showed that a reduction in the interest rate 
in an economy operating under flexible exchange rates leads to an 
increase in output and a depreciation of the domestic currency.
a. How does the reduction in interest rates in an economy 
with flexible exchange rates affect consumption and 
investment?


=== PAGE 214 ===
414 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
b. How does the reduction in interest rates in an economy 
with flexible exchange rates affect net exports?
4. Flexible exchange rates and foreign macroeconomic events 
Consider an open economy with flexible exchange rates. Let UIP 
stand for the uncovered interest parity condition.
a. In an IS-LM–UIP diagram, such as Figure 19-2, show the 
effect of an increase in foreign output, Y *, on domestic output 
(Y) and the exchange rate (E), when the domestic central bank 
leaves the policy interest rate unchanged. Explain in words.
b. In an IS-LM–UIP diagram, show the effect of an increase in 
the foreign interest rate, i *, on domestic output (Y) and the 
exchange rate (E), when the domestic central bank leaves 
the policy interest rate unchanged. Explain in words.
5. Flexible exchange rates and the responses to changes in foreign 
macroeconomic policy
Suppose there is an expansionary fiscal policy in the foreign 
country that increases Y* and i* at the same time.
a. In an IS-LM–UIP diagram, such as Figure 19-2, show the 
effect of the increase in foreign output, Y *, and the increase 
in the foreign interest rate, i*, on domestic output (Y) and 
the exchange rate (E), when the domestic central bank 
leaves the policy interest rate unchanged. Explain in words.
b. In an IS-LM–UIP diagram, show the effect of the increase 
in foreign output, Y *, and the increase in the foreign inter-
est rate, i*, on domestic output (Y) and the exchange rate 
(E), when the domestic central bank matches the increase 
in the foreign interest rate with an equal increase in the 
domestic interest rate. Explain in words.
c. In an IS-LM–UIP diagram, show the required domestic mon-
etary policy following the increase in foreign output, Y *, and 
the increase in the foreign interest rate, i *, if the goal of domes-
tic monetary policy is to leave domestic output (Y) unchanged. 
Explain in words. When might such a policy be necessary?
DIG DEEPER
6. Fixed exchange rates and foreign macroeconomic policy
Consider a fixed exchange rate system, in which a group of coun-
tries (called follower countries) peg their currencies to the currency of 
one country (called the leader country). Because the currency of the 
leader country is not fixed against the currencies of countries outside the 
fixed exchange rate system, the leader country can conduct monetary 
policy as it wishes. For this problem, consider the domestic country to be 
a follower country and the foreign country to be the leader country.
a. How does an increase in interest rates in the leader country 
affect the interest rate and output in the follower country?
b. How does the increase in leader country interest rates 
change the composition of output in the follower country? 
Assume the follower country does not change fiscal policy.
c. Can the follower country use fiscal policy to offset the 
effects of the leader country’s reduction in interest rates 
and leave domestic output unchanged? When might such 
a fiscal policy be desirable?
d. Fiscal policy involves changing government spending 
or changing taxes. Design a fiscal policy mix that leaves 
consumption and domestic output unchanged when the 
leader country increases interest rates. What component 
of output is changed?
7. The exchange rate as a policy tool
A flexible exchange rate combined with a willingness to change 
the domestic interest rate can increase the effectiveness of monetary 
policy in an open economy. Consider an economy that suffers a fall 
in business confidence (which tends to reduce investment).
a. In an IS-LM–UIP diagram, such as Figure 19-2, show the 
short-run effect of the fall in business confidence on out-
put and the exchange rate when the central bank leaves 
the interest rate unchanged. How does the composition of 
output change?
b. Suppose the central bank is willing to cut the interest rate 
to restore the level of output to its original value. How does 
this change the composition of output?
c. If the exchange rate was fixed and the central bank could not 
change the interest rate (remember, it is fixed at the foreign 
value i *), what policy options are left for the central bank?
d. Central banks generally favor flexible exchange rates. 
Explain why.
EXPLORE FURTHER
8. Demand for US assets, the dollar, and the trade deficit
This  question explores how an increase in demand for US 
assets may have slowed the depreciation of the dollar that many 
economists believe is warranted by the large US trade deficit and 
the need to stimulate the demand for domestic goods after the crisis. 
Here, we modify the IS-LM–UIP framework to analyze the effects 
of an increase in demand for US assets. Write the modified uncov-
ered interest parity condition as
11 + it2 = 11 + it* 21Et>Ee
t + 12 - x
where the parameter x represents factors affecting the relative 
demand for domestic assets. An increase in x means that investors 
are willing to hold domestic assets at a lower interest rate (given 
the foreign interest rate and the current and expected exchange 
rates).
a. Solve the UIP condition for the current exchange rate, Et.
b. Substitute the result from part a in the IS curve and con-
struct the UIP diagram. As in the text, you may assume 
that P and P* are constant and equal to one.
c. Suppose that as a result of a large trade deficit in the 
domestic economy, financial market participants believe 
that the domestic currency must depreciate in the future. 
Therefore, the expected exchange rate, Ee
t + 1, decreases. 
Show the effect of the decrease in the expected exchange 
rate in the IS-LM–UIP diagram. What are the effects on the 
exchange rate and the trade balance? (Hint: In analyzing 
the effect on the trade balance, remember why the IS curve 
shifted in the first place.)
d. Now suppose that the relative demand for domestic assets, 
x, increases. As a benchmark, suppose that the increase 
in x is exactly enough to return the IS curve to its origi-
nal position, before the decrease in the expected exchange 
rate. Show the combined effects of the decrease in Ee
t + 1 
and the increase in x in your IS-LM–UIP diagram. What 


=== PAGE 215 ===
are the ultimate effects on the exchange rate and the trade 
balance?
e. Based on your analysis, is it possible that an increase in 
demand for US assets could prevent the dollar from depre-
ciating? Is it possible that an increase in demand for US 
assets could worsen the US trade balance? Explain your 
answers.
9. Bond yields and long-run currency movements
a. Go the Web site of The Economist (www.economist.com) 
and find data on 10-year interest rates. Look in the section 
“Markets & Data” and then the subsection “Economic and 
Financial Indicators.” Look at the 10-year interest rates for 
the United States, Japan, China, Britain, Canada, Mexico, 
and the Euro area. For each country (treating the Euro 
area as a country), calculate the spreads as that country’s 
interest rate minus the US interest rate.
b. From the uncovered interest parity condition, the spreads 
from part a are the annualized expected appreciation 
rates of the dollar against other currencies. To calculate 
the 10-year expected appreciation, you must compound. 
(So, if x is the spread, the 10-year expected appreciation is 
311 + x210 - 14. Be careful about decimal points.) Is the 
dollar expected to depreciate or appreciate by much against 
the currency of any of its six major trading partners?
c. Given your answer to part b, for which country(ies) is a sig-
nificant appreciation or depreciation of the dollar expected 
over the next decade? Does your answer seem plausible?
10. The Trump administration tariffs
Use a search engine to find material on the Trump admin-
istration tariffs’ impact on the economy. What do economists 
say about them? You will learn something even by just reading 
the heading and the first paragraph of three to five articles.
 
Chapter 19 
Output, the Interest Rate, and the Exchange Rate 
415


=== PAGE 216 ===
416 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Assets
Liabilities
Bonds:     ∆B
Central bank money: ∆B- ∆B
Reserves: - ∆B
= 0
Figure 2
Balance Sheet of the Central Bank after an Open 
Market Operation and Induced Intervention in the 
Foreign Exchange Market
The assumption of perfect capital mobility is a good approxi-
mation of what happens in countries with highly developed 
financial markets and few capital controls, such as the United 
States, the United Kingdom, Japan, and countries in the euro 
area. But this assumption is more questionable in countries 
that have less developed financial markets or have capital con-
trols in place. In these countries, domestic financial investors 
may have neither the savvy nor the legal right to buy foreign 
bonds when domestic interest rates are low. The central bank 
may thus be able to decrease the interest rate while maintain-
ing a given exchange rate.
To examine these issues, we need to have another look at 
the balance sheet of the central bank. In Chapter 4, we assumed 
the only asset held by the central bank was domestic bonds. In 
an open economy, the central bank actually holds two types of 
assets: (1) domestic bonds and (2) foreign exchange reserves, 
which we shall think of as foreign currency—although they 
also take the form of foreign bonds or foreign interest-paying 
assets. Think of the balance sheet of the central bank as repre-
sented in Figure 1.
On the asset side are bonds and foreign exchange 
reserves, and on the liability side is central bank money. 
There are now two ways in which the central bank can 
change central bank money: by purchases or sales of  bonds 
in the bond market or by purchases or sales of  foreign cur-
rency in the foreign exchange market. (If  you did not read 
Section 4-3 in Chapter 4, replace central bank money with 
money supply and you will still get the basic argument.)
Perfect Capital Mobility and Fixed Exchange Rates
Consider first the effects of an open market operation under 
the joint assumptions of perfect capital mobility and fixed 
exchange rates (the assumptions we made in the last section 
of this chapter).
 
■Assume that the domestic interest rate and the foreign 
interest rate are initially equal, so i = i*. Now suppose the 
central bank embarks on an expansionary open market 
operation, buying bonds in the bond market in amount ∆B, 
and creating money—increasing central bank money—in 
exchange. This purchase of bonds leads to a decrease in the 
domestic interest rate, i. This is, however, only the beginning 
of the story.
 
■Now that the domestic interest rate is lower than the foreign 
interest rate, financial investors prefer to hold foreign bonds. 
To buy foreign bonds, they must first buy foreign currency. 
They go to the foreign exchange market and sell domestic 
currency for foreign currency.
 
■If the central bank did nothing, the price of domestic cur-
rency would fall, and the result would be a depreciation. 
Under its commitment to a fixed exchange rate, however, 
the central bank cannot allow the currency to depreciate. 
So it must intervene in the foreign exchange market and sell 
foreign currency for domestic currency. As it sells foreign 
currency and buys domestic money, central bank money 
decreases.
 
■How much foreign currency must the central bank sell? 
It must keep selling until central bank money is back to its 
pre–open market operation level, so the domestic interest 
rate is again equal to the foreign interest rate. Only then are 
financial investors willing to hold domestic bonds.
How long do all these steps take? Under perfect capital 
mobility, all this may happen within minutes of the original 
open market operation. After these steps, the balance sheet of 
the central bank looks as represented in Figure 2. Bond holdings 
are up by ∆B, reserves of foreign currency are down by ∆B, and 
central bank money is unchanged, having gone up by ∆B in the 
open market operation and down by ∆B as a result of the sale of 
foreign currency in the foreign exchange market.
Let’s summarize. Under fixed exchange rates and perfect 
capital mobility, the only effect of the open market operation 
is to change the composition of the central bank’s balance sheet 
but not central bank money or the interest rate.
Imperfect Capital Mobility and Fixed Exchange Rates
Let’s now move away from the assumption of perfect capital 
mobility. Suppose it takes some time for financial investors to 
shift between domestic bonds and foreign bonds.
Now an expansionary open market operation can ini-
tially bring the domestic interest rate below the foreign interest 
APPENDIX:  Fixed Exchange Rates, Interest Rates,  
and Capital Mobility
Assets
Liabilities
Bonds
Central bank money
Foreign exchange  
reserves
Figure 1
Balance Sheet of the Central Bank


=== PAGE 217 ===
 
Chapter 19 
Output, the Interest Rate, and the Exchange Rate 
417
rate. But over time, investors shift to foreign bonds, leading to 
an increase in the demand for foreign currency in the foreign 
exchange market. To avoid a depreciation of the domestic cur-
rency, the central bank must again stand ready to sell foreign 
currency and buy domestic currency. Eventually, the central 
bank buys enough domestic currency to offset the effects of the 
initial open market operation. Central bank money is back to its 
pre–open market operation level and so is the interest rate. The 
central bank holds more domestic bonds and smaller reserves of 
foreign currency.
The difference between this case and the case of perfect 
capital mobility is that, by accepting a loss in foreign exchange 
reserves, the central bank is now able to decrease interest rates 
for some time. If it takes just a few days for financial investors to 
adjust, the trade-off can be very unattractive—as many coun-
tries that have suffered large losses in reserves without much 
effect on the interest rate have discovered. But if the central 
bank can affect the domestic interest rate for a few weeks or 
months, it may, in some circumstances, be willing to do so.
Now let’s deviate further from perfect capital mobility. 
Suppose, in response to a decrease in the domestic interest 
rate, financial investors are either unwilling or unable to move 
much of their portfolio into foreign bonds. For example, there 
are administrative and legal controls on financial transac-
tions, making it illegal or very expensive for domestic residents 
to invest outside the country. This is the case for a number of 
emerging economies, from Latin America to China.
After an expansionary open market operation, the domes-
tic interest rate decreases, making domestic bonds less attractive. 
Some domestic investors may still be able to move into foreign 
bonds, selling domestic currency for foreign currency. To maintain 
the exchange rate, the central bank must buy domestic currency 
and supply foreign currency. However, the foreign exchange inter-
vention by the central bank may now be small compared to the 
initial open market operation. And if capital controls truly pre-
vent investors from moving into foreign bonds at all, there may be 
no need for such a foreign exchange intervention.
Even leaving this extreme case aside, the net effects of the 
initial open market operation and the following foreign exchange 
interventions are likely to be an increase in central bank money; a 
decrease in the domestic interest rate; an increase in the central bank’s 
bond holdings; and some—limited—loss in reserves of foreign currency.
With imperfect capital mobility, a country has some free-
dom to move the domestic interest rate while maintaining its 
exchange rate. This freedom depends primarily on three factors:
 
■The degree of development of its financial markets, and the 
willingness of domestic and foreign investors to shift between 
domestic and foreign assets.
 
■The degree of capital controls it is able to impose on both 
domestic and foreign investors.
 
■The amount of foreign exchange reserves it holds. The 
higher the reserves it has, the more it can afford the loss in 
reserves it is likely to sustain if it decreases the interest rate 
at a given exchange rate.
With the large movements in capital flows documented in 
the chapter, all of these issues are hot topics. Many countries 
are considering a more active use of capital controls than in the 
past. Many are also accumulating large reserves as a precaution 
against large capital outflows.
Key Term
foreign exchange reserves, 416


=== PAGE 218 ===
This page is intentionally left blank


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 218 ===
This page is intentionally left blank


=== PAGE 219 ===
419
Exchange Rate 
Regimes
I
n July 1944, representatives of 44 countries met in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, 
to design a new international monetary and exchange rate system. The system they 
adopted was based on fixed exchange rates, with all member countries other than the 
United States fixing the price of their currency in terms of dollars. In 1973, a series of 
exchange rate crises brought an abrupt end to the system—and an end to what is now called 
“the Bretton Woods period.” Since then, the world has been characterized by many exchange 
rate arrangements. Many countries operate under flexible exchange rates; some operate 
under fixed exchange rates; some go back and forth between regimes. Which exchange rate 
regime to choose is one of the most debated issues in macroeconomics and, as the cartoon 
suggests, a decision facing every country in the world. This chapter discusses this issue.
20
®1971 by Ed Fisher/The New Yorker collection/The Cartoon Bank


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 219 ===
Exchange Rate
Regimes

n July 1944, representatives of 44 countries met in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire,
to design a new international monetary and exchange rate system. The system they
adopted was based on fixed exchange rates, with all member countries other than the
United States fixing the price of their currency in terms of dollars. In 1973, a series of
exchange rate crises brought an abrupt end to the system—and an end to what is now called
“the Bretton Woods period.” Since then, the world has been characterized by many exchange
rate arrangements. Many countries operate under flexible exchange rates; some operate
under fixed exchange rates; some go back and forth between regimes. Which exchange rate
regime to choose is one of the most debated issues in macroeconomics and, as the cartoon
suggests, a decision facing every country in the world. This chapter discusses this issue.

“hen it's agreed. Until the dollar firms up, we let the clamshell fleat.”

®1971 by Ed Fisher/The New Yorker collection/The Cartoon Bank

419


=== PAGE 220 ===
420 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Section 20-1 looks at the medium run. It shows that, in contrast to the results we derived 
for the short run in Chapter 19, an economy ends up with the same real exchange rate 
and output level in the medium run, whether it operates under fixed or flexible exchange 
rates. This does not make the exchange rate regime irrelevant—the short run matters very 
much—but it is an important qualification to our previous analysis.
Section 20-2 takes another look at fixed exchange rates, with a focus on exchange rate 
crises. During a typical exchange rate crisis, a country operating under a fixed exchange 
rate is forced, often under dramatic conditions, to abandon its parity and to devalue. 
Such crises were behind the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system. They rocked the 
European Monetary System in the early 1990s, and they were a major element of the 
Asian Crisis of the late 1990s. It is important to understand why they happen and what 
they imply.
Section 20-3 takes another look at flexible exchange rates. It shows that the behavior of 
exchange rates and the relation of the exchange rate to monetary policy are more com-
plex than we assumed in Chapter 19. Large fluctuations in the exchange rate, and the  
difficulties in using monetary policy to affect the exchange rate, make a flexible exchange 
rate regime less attractive than it appeared to be in Chapter 19.
Section 20-4 puts all the analysis together and reviews the case for flexible or fixed 
rates. It discusses two important developments: the use of a common currency in much of 
Europe, and the move toward strong forms of fixed exchange rate regimes, from currency 
boards to dollarization.
If you remember one basic message from this chapter, it should be: There is no per-
fect exchange rate regime. Both fixed and flexible exchange rates have advantages 
and shortcomings. 
20-1 THE MEDIUM RUN
When we focused on the short run in Chapter 19, we drew a sharp contrast between 
the behavior of an economy with a flexible exchange rate and one with a fixed 
exchange rate:
 
■
Under a flexible exchange rate, a country that needed to achieve a real depreciation 
(for example, to reduce its trade deficit, or to get out of a recession, or both) could do 
so by relying on an expansionary monetary policy to achieve both a lower interest 
rate and a decrease in the exchange rate—a depreciation.
 
■
Under a fixed exchange rate, a country lost both instruments. By definition, its nominal 
exchange rate was fixed and thus could not be adjusted. Moreover, the fixed exchange 
rate and the interest parity condition implied that the country could not adjust its 
interest rate either; the domestic interest rate had to remain equal to the foreign inter-
est rate.
This appeared to make a flexible exchange rate regime definitely more attractive 
than a fixed exchange rate regime. Why should a country give up two macroeconomic 
instruments—the exchange rate and the interest rate? As we now shift focus from the 
short run to the medium run, you will see that this previous conclusion needs to be qual-
ified. Although our conclusions about the short run were valid, in the medium run the 
difference between the two regimes fades away. More specifically, in the medium run, the 
economy reaches the same real exchange rate and the same level of output whether it 
operates under a fixed or flexible exchange rate.


=== PAGE 221 ===
 
Chapter 20 
Exchange Rate Regimes 
421
The intuition for this result is easy to give. Recall the definition of the real exchange 
rate:
e = EP
P*
The real exchange rate, e, is equal to the nominal exchange rate, E (the price of domestic 
currency in terms of foreign currency) times the domestic price level, P, divided by the 
foreign price level, P*. There are, therefore, two ways in which the real exchange rate can 
adjust:
 
■
Through a change in the nominal exchange rate, E: By definition, this can be 
done only under flexible exchange rates. And if we assume that the domestic price 
level, P, and the foreign price level, P*, do not change in the short run, it is the 
only way to adjust the real exchange rate in the short run.
 
■
Through a change in the domestic price level, P, relative to the foreign price level, P*. In 
the medium run, as prices adjust, this option is open even to a country operating under a 
fixed (nominal) exchange rate. And this is indeed what happens under a fixed exchange 
rate: The adjustment takes place through the price level rather than through the nomi-
nal exchange rate.
The IS Relation under Fixed Exchange Rates
In an open economy with fixed exchange rates, we can write the IS relation as
 
Y = Ya EQP
P *, G, T, i * - pe, Y *b
     
 
(20.1)
1-,  +, -,            -, +2
The derivation of equation (20.1) is left to  Appendix 1  at the end of this chapter, 
“Deriving the IS Relation under Fixed Exchange Rates.” The intuition behind the equa-
tion is straightforward, however. Demand, and in turn, output, depend:
 
■
negatively on the real exchange rate, EQP>P*. EQ denotes the fixed nominal exchange 
rate; P and P* denote the domestic and foreign price levels. A higher real exchange 
rate implies a lower demand for domestic goods and in turn lower output.
 
■
positively on government spending, G, and negatively on taxes, T.
 
■
negatively on the domestic real interest rate, which itself  is equal to the domes-
tic nominal interest rate minus expected inflation. Under the interest parity 
condition and fixed exchange rates, the domestic nominal interest rate is equal 
to the foreign nominal interest rate, i*, so the domestic real interest rate is given 
by i* - pe.
 
■
positively on foreign output, Y*, through the effect on exports.
Equilibrium in the Short and the Medium Run
Consider an economy where the real exchange rate is too high. As a result, the trade bal-
ance is in deficit and output is below potential.
As we saw in Chapter 19, under a flexible exchange rate regime, the central bank 
could in principle solve the problem. It could, by decreasing the interest rate, induce a 
nominal depreciation. Given the domestic and the foreign price levels, which we assumed 
were fixed in the short run, the nominal depreciation implied a real depreciation, an 
improvement in the trade balance, and an increase in output.
There are three ways in 
which a US car can become 
cheaper relative to a 
Japanese car: first, through a 
decrease in the dollar price of 
the US car; second, through 
an increase in the yen price 
of the Japanese car; third, 
through a decrease in the 
nominal exchange rate—a 
decrease in the value of the 
dollar in terms of the yen.
b


=== PAGE 222 ===
422 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Under a fixed exchange rate regime, however, the central bank cannot move the 
domestic interest rate. Thus, in the short run, the trade deficit remains, and the country 
remains in recession.
In the medium run, however, prices can adjust. We saw in the core that the behavior 
of prices is well described by the Phillips curve relation (Chapter 9, equation (9.3)):
p - pe = (a>L)(Y - Yn)
When output is above potential, the inflation rate (i.e., the rate of change of prices) 
is higher than expected. When output is below potential, as is the case we are consider-
ing here, the inflation rate is lower than expected. Following the discussion in Chapter 9, 
I shall assume here that expected inflation is constant so that the Phillips curve relation 
is given by:
 
p - pQ = (a>L)(Y - Yn) 
(20.2)
We are now nearly ready to think about dynamics and the medium run. We need to 
make an assumption about the initial domestic and foreign inflation rates. Denote the 
foreign inflation rate by p*. Suppose that if output were equal to potential output, domes-
tic and foreign inflation were equal to each other and both equal to pQ , so p = p* = pQ . 
That is, if both economies are operating at potential, inflation rates were the same, rela-
tive price levels would remain constant, and so would the real exchange rate.
As we are assuming that we start from a situation where output is below poten-
tial, equation (20.2) implies that domestic inflation is lower than it would be if output 
were at potential, and thus lower than foreign inflation. Put another way, the domes-
tic price level increases more slowly than the foreign price level. This implies that, 
given the nominal exchange rate, which is fixed, the real exchange rate decreases. 
As a result, net exports increase over time, and so does output. In the medium run, 
output is back at potential, and domestic inflation is back to pQ , thus equal to foreign 
inflation. With domestic and foreign inflation being equal, the real exchange rate is 
constant.
To summarize:
 
■
In the short run, a fixed nominal exchange rate implies a fixed real exchange rate.
 
■
In the medium run, the real exchange rate can adjust even if the nominal exchange 
rate is fixed. This adjustment is achieved through movements in relative price levels 
over time.
The Case for and against a Devaluation
The result that, even under fixed exchange rates, the economy can return to potential 
output in the medium run is important. But it does not eliminate the fact that the process 
of adjustment can be long and painful. Output may remain too low and unemployment 
too high for a long time.
Are there faster and better ways to return output to potential? The answer, within 
the model we have just developed, is a clear yes. Suppose that the government decides, 
while keeping the fixed exchange rate regime, to allow for a one-time devaluation. Given 
the price level, the devaluation (a decrease in the nominal exchange rate) leads, in the 
short run, to a real depreciation (a decrease in the real exchange rate) and therefore to 
an increase in output. In principle, the right size devaluation can thus achieve in the 
short run what was achieved above only in the medium run, and thus avoid much of 
the pain. So whenever a country under fixed exchange rates faces either a large trade 
deficit or a severe recession, there is heavy political pressure either to give up the fixed 
exchange rate regime altogether or, at least, to have a one-time devaluation. Perhaps 
p 6 p* 1 EQP>P *T c


=== PAGE 223 ===
 
Chapter 20 
Exchange Rate Regimes 
423
the most forceful presentation of this view was made 90 years ago by John Maynard 
Keynes, who argued against Winston Churchill’s decision to return the British pound 
in 1925 to its pre–World War I parity with gold. His arguments are presented in the 
Focus Box “The Return of Britain to the Gold Standard: Keynes versus Churchill.” 
Most economic historians believe that history proved Keynes right, and that overvalu-
ation of the pound was one of the main reasons for Britain’s poor economic perfor-
mance after World War I.
Those who oppose a shift to flexible exchange rates or who oppose a devaluation 
argue that there are good reasons to choose fixed exchange rates, and that too much 
willingness to devalue defeats the purpose of adopting a fixed exchange rate regime in 
the first place. They argue that too much willingness on the part of governments to con-
sider devaluations actually leads to an increased likelihood of exchange rate crises. To 
understand their arguments, we now turn to these crises: what triggers them and what 
their implications might be.
The Return of Britain to the Gold 
Standard: Keynes versus Churchill
In 1925, Britain decided to return to the gold standard. The 
gold standard was a system in which each country fixed 
the price of its currency in terms of gold and stood ready to 
exchange gold for currency at the stated parity. This system 
implied fixed exchange rates between countries. (If, for exam-
ple, one unit of currency in country A was worth two units 
of gold, and one unit of currency in country B was worth one 
unit of gold, the exchange rate between the two was 2 (or ½, 
depending on which you take as a domestic country).
The gold standard had been in place from 1870 until 
World War I. Because of the need to finance the war, and 
to do so in part by money creation, Britain suspended the 
gold standard in 1914. In 1925, Winston Churchill, then 
Britain’s Chancellor of the Exchequer (the British equivalent 
of Secretary of the Treasury in the United States), decided to 
return to the gold standard and to return to it at the pre-war 
parity—that is, at the pre-war value of the pound in terms 
of gold. But because prices had increased faster in Britain 
than in many of its trading partners, returning to the pre-
war parity implied a large real appreciation: At the same 
nominal exchange rate as before the war, British goods were 
now relatively more expensive relative to foreign goods. (Go 
back to the definition of the real exchange rate, e = EP>P*
: The price level in Britain, P, had increased more than the 
foreign price level, P *. At a given nominal exchange rate, E
, this implied that e was higher, that Britain suffered from a 
real appreciation.)
Keynes severely criticized the decision to return to the 
pre-war parity. In The Economic Consequences of Mr. 
Churchill, a book he published in 1925, Keynes argued as 
follows: If Britain were going to return to the gold standard, 
it should have done so at a lower price of currency in terms 
of gold; that is, at a lower nominal exchange rate than the 
pre-war nominal exchange rate. In a newspaper article, he 
articulated his views as follows:
There remains, however, the objection to which I have 
never ceased to attach importance, against the return to gold 
in actual present conditions, in view of the possible conse-
quences on the state of trade and employment. I believe that 
our price level is too high, if it is converted to gold at the 
par of exchange, in relation to gold prices elsewhere; and 
if we consider the prices of those articles only which are 
not the subject of international trade, and of services, i.e. 
wages, we shall find that these are materially too high—
not less than 5 per cent, and probably 10 per cent. Thus, 
unless the situation is saved by a rise of prices elsewhere, 
the Chancellor is committing us to a policy of forcing down 
money wages by perhaps 2 shillings in the Pound.
I do not believe that this can be achieved without the grav-
est danger to industrial profits and industrial peace. I would 
much rather leave the gold value of our currency where it 
was some months ago than embark on a struggle with every 
trade union in the country to reduce money wages. It seems 
wiser and simpler and saner to leave the currency to find its 
own level for some time longer rather than force a situation 
where employers are faced with the alternative of closing 
down or of lowering wages, cost what the struggle may.
For this reason, I remain of the opinion that the 
Chancellor of the Exchequer has done an ill-judged thing—
ill judged because we are running the risk for no adequate 
reward if all goes well.
Keynes’s prediction turned out to be right. While other 
countries were growing, Britain remained in recession for the 
rest of the decade. Most economic historians attribute a good 
part of the blame to the initial overvaluation.1
FOCUS
1“An American Study of Shares versus Bonds as Permanent Investment,” The Nation and the Athenaeum, Supplement, 
May 2, 1925, pp. 157-158.


=== PAGE 224 ===
424 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
20-2 EXCHANGE RATE CRISES UNDER 
FIXED EXCHANGE RATES
Suppose a country has chosen to operate under a fixed exchange rate. Suppose also that 
financial investors start believing there may soon be an exchange rate adjustment—
either a devaluation or a shift to a flexible exchange rate regime accompanied by a depre-
ciation. We just saw why this might be the case:
 
■
The real exchange rate may be too high. Or put another way, the domestic currency 
may be overvalued, leading to too large a current account deficit. In this case, a real 
depreciation is called for. Although this could be achieved in the medium run with-
out a devaluation, financial investors conclude that the government will take the 
quickest way out—and devalue.
Such an overvaluation often happens in countries that peg their nominal 
exchange rate to the currency of a country with lower inflation. Higher relative infla-
tion implies a steadily increasing price of domestic goods relative to foreign goods, 
a steady real appreciation, and so a steady worsening of the trade position. As time 
passes, the need for an adjustment of the real exchange rate increases, and finan-
cial investors become more and more nervous. They start thinking that a devaluation 
might be coming.
 
■
Internal conditions may call for a decrease in the domestic interest rate. As we 
have seen, a decrease in the domestic interest rate cannot be achieved under fixed 
exchange rates. But it can be achieved if the country is willing to shift to a flexible 
exchange rate regime. If a country lets the exchange rate float and then decreases 
its domestic interest rate, we know from Chapter 19 that this will trigger a decrease 
in the nominal exchange rate—a nominal depreciation.
As soon as financial markets believe a devaluation may be coming, then maintaining 
the exchange rate requires an increase—often a large one—in the domestic interest rate.
To see this, return to the interest parity condition we derived in Chapter 17:
 
it = it* -  1Et + 1
e
- Et2
Et
 
(20.3)
In Chapter 17, we interpreted this equation as a relation among the one-year domes-
tic and foreign nominal interest rates, the current exchange rate, and the expected 
exchange rate a year hence. But the choice of one year as the period was arbitrary. The 
relation holds over a day, a week, a month. If financial markets expect the exchange rate 
to be 2% lower a month from now, they will hold domestic bonds only if the one-month 
domestic interest rate exceeds the one-month foreign interest rate by 2% (or, if we express 
interest rates at an annual rate, if the annual domestic interest rate exceeds the annual 
foreign interest rate by 2% * 12 = 24%).
Under fixed exchange rates, the current exchange rate, Et, is set at some level, 
say Et = EQ. If markets expect that the parity will be maintained over the period, then 
Ee
t + 1 = EQ, and the interest parity condition simply states that the domestic and foreign 
interest rates must be equal.
Suppose, however, that participants in financial markets start anticipating a 
devaluation—a decision by the central bank to give up the parity and decrease the 
exchange rate in the future. Suppose they believe that, in the coming month, there 
is a 75% chance the parity will be maintained and a 25% chance there will be a 20% 
devaluation. The term 1Ee
t + 1 - Et2>Et in the interest parity equation (20.3), which we 
assumed to be equal to zero earlier, now equals 0.75 * 0% + 0.25 * (-20%) = -5% 
(a 75% chance of no change plus a 25% chance of a devaluation of 20%).
To let a currency “float” is to 
allow a move from a fixed 
to a flexible exchange rate 
regime. A floating exchange 
rate regime is the same as a 
flexible exchange rate regime.
c
Because it is more conve-
nient, we use the approxi-
mation, equation (17.4), 
rather than the original 
 interest parity condition, 
equation (17.2).
c
They may require more 
than that, given that there is 
clearly a lot of risk involved. 
Our computation ignores the 
risk premium. c


=== PAGE 225 ===
 
Chapter 20 
Exchange Rate Regimes 
425
This implies that, if the central bank wants to maintain the existing parity, it must 
now set a monthly interest rate 5% higher than before—60% higher at an annual rate 
(12 months * 5% per month); 60% is the interest differential needed to convince inves-
tors to hold domestic bonds rather than foreign bonds! Any smaller interest differential 
and investors will not want to hold domestic bonds.
What, then, are the choices confronting the government and the central bank?
 
■
First, the government and the central bank can try to convince markets that 
they have no intention of devaluing. This is always the first line of defense: 
Communiqués are issued, and prime ministers go on TV to reiterate their absolute 
commitment to the existing parity. But words are cheap, and they rarely convince 
financial investors.
 
■
Second, the central bank can increase the interest rate, but by less than would be 
needed to satisfy equation (20.3)—in our example, by less than 60%. Although 
domestic interest rates are high, they are not high enough to fully compensate for 
the perceived risk of devaluation. This action typically leads to a large capital out-
flow because, under the circumstances, financial investors still prefer to get out of 
domestic bonds and into foreign bonds, which offer higher expected returns in terms 
of domestic currency. Thus investors sell domestic bonds, getting the proceeds in 
domestic currency. They then go to the foreign exchange market to sell domestic cur-
rency for foreign currency in order to buy foreign bonds. If the central bank did not 
intervene in the foreign exchange market, the large sales of domestic currency for 
foreign currency would lead to a depreciation. If the central bank wants to maintain 
the fixed exchange rate, it must therefore stand ready to buy domestic currency and 
sell foreign currency at the current exchange rate. In doing so, it often loses most of 
its reserves of foreign currency. (The mechanics of central bank intervention were 
described in the appendix to Chapter 19.)
 
■
Eventually—after a few hours or a few weeks—the choice for the central bank 
becomes either to increase the interest rate enough to satisfy equation (20.3) or 
to validate the market’s expectations and devalue. Setting a very high short-term 
domestic interest rate can have a devastating effect on demand and output—no 
firm wants to invest, and no consumer wants to borrow when interest rates are 
very high. This course of action makes sense only if (1) the perceived probability 
of a devaluation is small, so the interest rate does not have to be too high; and 
(2) the government believes markets will soon become convinced that no devalu-
ation is coming, allowing domestic interest rates to decrease. Otherwise, the only 
option is to devalue. (All these steps were at the center of the exchange rate crisis 
that affected much of Western Europe in 1992. See the Focus Box “The 1992 
EMS Crisis.”)
To summarize: Expectations that a devaluation may be coming can trigger an 
exchange rate crisis. Faced with such expectations, the government has two options:
 
■
give in and devalue, or
 
■
fight and maintain the parity, at the cost of very high interest rates and a potential 
recession. Fighting may not work anyway; the recession may force the government 
to change policy later on—or force the government out of office.
An interesting twist here is that a devaluation can occur even if the belief that a 
devaluation was coming was initially groundless. In other words, even if the govern-
ment initially has no intention of devaluing, it might be forced to do so if financial mar-
kets believe that it will devalue. The cost of maintaining the parity would be a long period 
of high interest rates and a recession; the government might prefer to devalue instead.
In most countries, the gov-
ernment is formally in charge 
of choosing the parity and 
the central bank is formally 
in charge of maintaining it. In 
practice, choosing and main-
taining the parity are joint 
responsibilities of the govern-
ment and the central bank.
b
In the summer of 1998, Boris 
Yeltsin announced that the 
Russian government had no 
intention of devaluing the 
ruble. Two weeks later, the 
ruble collapsed.
b
This should remind you of our 
discussion of bank runs in 
Chapter 6. The rumor that a 
bank is in trouble may trigger 
a run on the bank and force it 
to close, whether or not there 
was truth to the rumor.
b


=== PAGE 226 ===
The 1992 EMS Crisis
An example of the problems we discussed in this section is 
the exchange rate crisis that shook the European Monetary 
System (EMS) in the early 1990s.
At the start of the 1990s, the EMS appeared to work 
well. Established in 1979, the EMS was an exchange rate 
system based on fixed parities with bands. Each member 
country (among them, France, Germany, Italy, and, begin-
ning in 1990, the United Kingdom) had to maintain its 
exchange rate vis-à-vis all other member countries within 
narrow bands. The first few years had been rocky, with 
many  realignments—adjustment of parities—among mem-
ber countries. But from 1987 to 1992 there were only two 
realignments, and there was increasing talk about narrow-
ing the bands further and even moving to the next stage—
adoption of a common currency.
In 1992, however, financial markets became increas-
ingly convinced that more realignments were soon to 
come. The reason was one we saw in Chapter 19: the 
macroeconomic implications of  Germany’s reunification. 
Because of  the pressure on demand after reunification, the 
Bundesbank (the German central bank) was maintaining 
high interest rates to avoid too large an increase in output 
and an increase in inflation in Germany. While Germany’s 
EMS partners needed lower interest rates to reduce a 
growing unemployment problem, they had to match the 
German interest rates to maintain their EMS parities. To 
financial markets, the position of  Germany’s EMS partners 
looked increasingly untenable. Lower interest rates out-
side Germany and thus devaluations of  many currencies 
relative to the Deutsche Mark (DM) appeared increasingly 
likely.
Throughout 1992, the perceived probability of a devalu-
ation forced a number of EMS countries to maintain higher 
nominal interest rates than even those in Germany. Still, the 
first major crisis did not come until September 1992.
In early September 1992, the belief that a number of 
countries were soon going to devalue led to speculative 
attacks on a number of currencies, with financial inves-
tors selling in anticipation of a devaluation. All the lines of 
defense described earlier were used by the central banks and 
the governments of the countries under attack. First, solemn 
communiqués were issued, but with no discernible effect. 
Then interest rates were increased. For example, Sweden’s 
overnight interest rate (the rate for lending and borrow-
ing overnight) increased to 500% (expressed at an annual 
rate)! But even such extremely high interest rates were not 
enough to prevent capital outflows and large losses of foreign 
exchange reserves by the central banks under pressure.
At that point, different countries took different courses of 
action. Spain devalued its exchange rate. Italy and the United 
Kingdom suspended their participation in the EMS. France 
decided to tough it out through higher interest rates until the 
storm was over. Figure 1 shows the evolution of the exchange 
rates relative to the DM for a number of European countries 
from January 1992 to December 1993. You can clearly see 
the effects of the September 1992 crisis, highlighted in the 
figure, and the ensuing depreciations/devaluations.
By the end of September, investors, by and large, believed 
that no further devaluations were imminent. Some countries 
were no longer in the EMS. Others had devalued but remained 
in the EMS, and those that had maintained their parity had 
shown their determination to stay in the EMS, even if this 
FOCUS
January 1992 = 1.00
1992-01
1992-03
1992-05
1992-07
1992-09
1992-11
1993-01
1993-03
1993-05
1993-07
1993-09
1993-11
1.05
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70
FINLAND
SWEDEN
UK
ITALY
SPAIN
FRANCE
PORTUGAL
Figure 1
Exchange Rates of Selected European Countries Relative to the Deutsche 
Mark, January 1992 to December 1993
Source: IMF database.
426 
The Open Economy 
Extensions


=== PAGE 227 ===
 
Chapter 20 
Exchange Rate Regimes 
427
20-3  EXCHANGE RATE MOVEMENTS 
UNDER FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATES
In the model we developed in Chapter 19, there was a simple relation between the interest 
rate and the exchange rate: The lower the interest rate, the lower the exchange rate. This 
implied that a country that wanted to maintain a stable exchange rate just had to main-
tain its interest rate close to the foreign interest rate. A country that wanted to achieve a 
given depreciation just had to decrease its interest rate by the right amount.
In reality, the relation between the interest rate and the exchange rate is not so 
simple. Exchange rates often move even in the absence of movements in interest rates. 
Furthermore, the size of the effect of a given change in the interest rate on the exchange 
rate is hard to predict. This makes it much harder for monetary policy to achieve its 
desired outcome.
To see why things are more complicated, we must return once again to the interest 
parity condition we derived in Chapter 17, equation (17.2):
(1 + it) = (1 + it*)a Et
Ee
t + 1
b
As we did in Chapter 19 (equation (19.4)), multiply both sides by Ee
t + 1 and reorga-
nize to get
 
Et = 1 + it
1 + it*  Ee
t + 1 
(20.4)
Think of the time period (from t to t + 1) as one year. The exchange rate this year 
depends on the one-year domestic interest rate, the one-year foreign interest rate, and 
the exchange rate expected for next year.
We assumed in Chapter 19 that the expected exchange rate next year, Ee
t + 1, was con-
stant. But this was a simplification. The exchange rate expected one year hence is not 
constant. Using equation (20.4), but now for next year, it is clear that the exchange rate 
next year will depend on next year’s one-year domestic interest rate, the one-year foreign 
interest rate, the exchange rate expected for the year after, and so on. So any change in 
expectations of current and future domestic and foreign interest rates, as well as changes 
in the expected exchange rate in the far future, will affect the exchange rate today.
Let’s explore this more closely. Write equation (20.4) for year t + 1 rather than for 
year t:
Et + 1 = 1 + it + 1
1 + it + 1
*
 Ee
t + 2
meant very high interest rates. But the underlying problem—the high 
German interest rates—was still present, and it was only a matter of 
time before the next crisis. In November 1992, new speculation forced 
a devaluation of the Spanish peseta, the Portuguese escudo, and the 
Swedish krona. The peseta and the escudo were further devalued in 
May 1993. In July 1993, after yet another large speculative attack, 
EMS countries decided to adopt large fluctuation bands (plus or minus 
15%) around central parities, in effect moving to a system that allowed 
for large exchange rate fluctuations.
This system with wider bands was kept until the adoption of a com-
mon currency, the euro, in January 1999.
To summarize: The 1992 EMS crisis came from the perception by 
financial markets that the high interest rates forced by Germany on its 
partners under the rules of the EMS were becoming very costly.
The belief that some countries might want to devalue or get out of 
the EMS led investors to ask for even higher interest rates, making it 
even more costly for those countries to maintain their parity.
In the end, some countries could not bear the cost; some devalued, 
some dropped out. Others remained in the system, but at a substan-
tial cost in terms of output. (For example, average growth in France 
from 1990 to 1996 was 1.2%, compared to 2.3% for Germany over 
the same period.)


=== PAGE 228 ===
428 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
The exchange rate in year t + 1 depends on the domestic and foreign interest rates 
for year t + 1, as well as on the expected future exchange rate in year t + 2. So the 
expectation of the exchange rate in year t + 1 held as of year t is given by:
Ee
t + 1 = 1 + ie
t + 1
1 + i*e
t + 1
 Ee
t + 2
Replacing Ee
t + 1 in equation (20.4) with the expression above gives:
Et = 11 + it211 + ie
t + 12
11 + it*211 + i*e
t + 12 Ee
t + 2
The current exchange rate depends on this year’s domestic and foreign interest 
rates, on next year’s expected domestic and foreign interest rates, and on the expected 
exchange rate two years from now. Continuing to solve forward in time in the same way 
(by replacing Ee
t + 2, Ee
t + 3, and so on until year t + n), we get:
 
Et = 11 + it211 + ie
t + 12 g 11 + ie
t + n2
11 + it*211 + i*e
t + 12 g 11 + i*e
t + n2
 Ee
t + n + 1 
(20.5)
Suppose we take n to be large, say 10 years (equation (20.5) holds for any value of n). 
This relation tells us that the current exchange rate depends on two sets of factors:
 
■
Current and expected domestic and foreign interest rates for each year over the next 
10 years.
 
■
The expected exchange rate 10 years from now.
For some purposes, it is useful to go further and derive a relation among current and 
expected future domestic and foreign real interest rates, the current real exchange rate, 
and the expected future real exchange rate. This is done in Appendix 2 at the end of this 
chapter. (The derivation is not much fun, but it is a useful way of brushing up on the rela-
tion between real interest rates and nominal interest rates, and real exchange rates and 
nominal exchange rates.) Equation (20.5) is sufficient to make three important points, 
each outlined in more detail below:
 
■
The level of today’s exchange rate will move one-for-one with the future expected 
exchange rate.
 
■
Today’s exchange rate will move when future expected interest rates move in either 
country.
 
■
Because today’s exchange rate moves with any change in expectations, the exchange 
rate will be volatile, that is, move frequently and perhaps by large amounts.
Exchange Rates and the Current Account
Any factor that moves the expected future exchange rate, Ee
t + n, also moves the current 
exchange rate, Et. Indeed, if the domestic interest rate and the foreign interest rate are 
expected to be the same in both countries from t to t + n, the fraction on the right in equa-
tion (20.5) is equal to 1, so the relation reduces to Et = Ee
t + n. In words: The effect of any 
change in the expected future exchange rate on the current exchange rate is one-for-one.
If we think of n as large (say, 10 years or more), we can think of Ee
t + n as the exchange 
rate required to achieve current account balance in the medium or long run. Countries 
cannot borrow—run a current account deficit—forever, and will not want to lend—run 
a current account surplus—forever either. Thus, any news that affects forecasts of the 
current account balance in the future is likely to have an effect on the expected future 
exchange rate and in turn on the exchange rate today. For example, the announcement of 
The basic lesson from 
Appendix 2: For all the state-
ments, you can put “real” in 
front of exchange rates and 
interest rates, and the state-
ments will also hold. c


=== PAGE 229 ===
 
Chapter 20 
Exchange Rate Regimes 
429
a larger-than-expected current account deficit may lead investors to conclude that a depre-
ciation will eventually be needed to repay the increased debt. Thus, Ee
t + n will decrease, lead-
ing in turn to a decrease in Et today.
Exchange Rates and Current and Future Interest Rates
Any factor that moves current or expected future domestic or foreign interest rates 
between years t and t + n also moves the current exchange rate. For example, given for-
eign interest rates, an increase in current or expected future domestic interest rates leads 
to an increase in Et—an appreciation.
This implies that any variable that causes investors to change their expectations of 
future interest rates will lead to a change in the exchange rate today. For example, the 
“dance of the dollar” in the 1980s that we discussed in Chapter 17—the sharp apprecia-
tion of the dollar in the first half of the decade, followed by an equally sharp deprecia-
tion later—can be largely explained by the movement in current and expected future US 
interest rates relative to interest rates in the rest of the world during that period. During 
the first half of the 1980s, tight monetary policy and expansionary fiscal policy com-
bined to increase both short- and long-term interest rates, with the increase in long-term 
rates reflecting anticipations of high short-term interest rates in the future. This increase 
in both current and expected future interest rates was, in turn, the main cause of the dol-
lar appreciation. Both fiscal and monetary policy were reversed in the second half of the 
decade, leading to lower US interest rates and a depreciation of the dollar.
Exchange Rate Volatility
The third implication follows from the first two. In reality, and in contrast to our analysis 
in Chapter 19, the relation between the interest rate and the exchange rate is anything but 
mechanical. When the central bank cuts the policy rate, financial markets have to assess 
whether this action signals a major shift in monetary policy and the cut in the interest rate is 
just the first of many such cuts, or whether this cut is just a temporary movement in interest 
rates. Announcements by the central bank may not be useful. The central bank itself may 
not know what it will do in the future; typically, it will be reacting to early signals, which 
may be reversed later. Investors also have to assess how foreign central banks will react: 
whether they will stay put or follow suit and cut their own interest rates. All this makes it 
much harder to predict the effect of the change in the interest rate be on the exchange rate.
Let’s be more concrete. Go back to equation (20.5). Assume that Ee
t + n = 1. Assume 
that current and expected future domestic interest rates, and current and expected future 
foreign interest rates, are all equal to 5%. The current exchange rate is then given by:
Et = (1.05)n
(1.05)n 1 = 1
Now consider a reduction in the current domestic interest rate, it, from 5% to 3%. 
Will this lead to a decrease in Et—to a depreciation—and if so by how much? The answer: 
It depends.
Suppose the interest rate is expected to be lower for just one year, so the n - 1 
expected future interest rates remain unchanged. The current exchange rate then 
decreases to:
Et = (1.03)(1.05)n - 1
(1.05)n
= 1.03
1.05 = 0.98
The lower interest rate leads to a decrease in the exchange rate—a depreciation—of 
only 2%.
News about future current 
accounts is likely to affect 
the exchange rate today. 
What effect would you 
expect, for example, from the 
announcement of a major oil 
discovery?
b
News about current and 
future domestic and foreign 
interest rates is likely to affect 
the exchange rate.
b
For more on the relation 
between long-term inter-
est rates and current and 
expected future short-term 
interest rates, go back to 
Chapter 14.
b
We leave aside here other 
factors that also move the 
exchange rate, such as 
changing perceptions of 
risk, which we discussed in 
a Focus Box titled “Capital 
Flows, Sudden Stops, and the 
Limits to the Interest Parity 
Condition” in Chapter 19.
b
If this reminds you of our 
discussion in Chapter 14 of 
how monetary policy affects 
stock prices, you are right. 
This is more than a coinci-
dence. Like stock prices, the 
exchange rate depends very 
much on expectations of 
variables far into the future. 
How expectations change 
in response to a change in 
a current variable (here, the 
interest rate) determines the 
outcome.
b


=== PAGE 230 ===
430 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Suppose instead that, when the current interest rate declines from 5% to 3%, inves-
tors expect the decline to last for five years (so ie
t + 4 = g = ie
t + 1 = it = 3%). The 
exchange rate then decreases to:
Et = (1.03)5(1.05)n - 5
(1.05)n
= (1.03)5
(1.05)5 = 0.90
The lower interest rate now leads to a decrease in the exchange rate—a  depreciation—of 
10%, a much larger effect.
You can surely think of still more outcomes. Suppose investors had anticipated that 
the central bank was going to decrease interest rates, and the actual decrease turns out to 
be smaller than they anticipated. In this case, the investors will revise their expectations 
of future nominal interest rates upward, leading to an appreciation rather than a depre-
ciation of the currency.
When, at the end of the Bretton Woods period, countries moved from fixed exchange 
rates to flexible exchange rates, most economists expected that exchange rates, while flex-
ible, would be stable. The large fluctuations in exchange rates that followed—and have 
continued to this day—came as a surprise. For some time, these fluctuations were thought 
to be the result of irrational speculation in foreign exchange markets. It was not until the 
mid-1970s that economists realized that these large movements could be explained, as we 
have explained here, by the rational reaction of financial markets to news about future 
interest rates and the future exchange rate. This has an important implication:
A country that decides to operate under flexible exchange rates must accept the fact 
that it will be exposed to substantial exchange rate fluctuations over time.
20-4 CHOOSING BETWEEN EXCHANGE 
RATE REGIMES
Let us now return to the question that motivates this chapter. Should countries choose 
flexible exchange rates or fixed exchange rates? Are there circumstances under which 
flexible rates dominate, and others under which fixed rates dominate?
Much of what we have seen in this and the previous chapter would seem to favor 
flexible exchange rates:
 
■
Section 20-1 argued that the exchange rate regime may not matter in the medium 
run, but it is still the case that it matters in the short run. In the short run, coun-
tries that operate under fixed exchange rates and perfect capital mobility give up two 
macroeconomic instruments: the interest rate and the exchange rate. This not only 
reduces their ability to respond to shocks but can lead to exchange rate crises.
 
■
Section 20-2 argued that, in a country with fixed exchange rates, the anticipation 
of a devaluation leads investors to ask for high interest rates. This in turn makes the 
economic situation worse and puts more pressure on the country to devalue. This is 
another argument against fixed exchange rates.
 
■
Section 20-3 introduced one argument against flexible exchange rates: they are 
likely to fluctuate a lot and be difficult to control through monetary policy.
On balance, it appears that, from a macroeconomic viewpoint, flexible exchange 
rates are preferable to fixed exchange rates. This is indeed the consensus that has emerged 
among economists and policymakers. The consensus is as follows:
In general, flexible exchange rates are preferable. There are, however, two excep-
tions. First, when a group of countries is already tightly integrated, a common currency 
may be the right solution. Second, when the central bank cannot be trusted to follow 


=== PAGE 231 ===
 
Chapter 20 
Exchange Rate Regimes 
431
a responsible monetary policy under flexible exchange rates, a strong form of fixed 
exchange rates, such as a currency board or dollarization, may be the right solution.
Let us discuss in turn these two exceptions.
Common Currency Areas
Countries that operate under a fixed exchange rate regime are constrained to have the 
same interest rate. But how costly is that constraint? If the countries face roughly the 
same macroeconomic problems and the same shocks, they would likely have chosen sim-
ilar policies in the first place. Forcing them to have the same monetary policy may not be 
much of a constraint.
This argument was first explored by Robert Mundell, who looked at the conditions 
under which a set of countries might want to operate under fixed exchange rates or even 
adopt a common currency. For countries to constitute an optimal currency area, he 
argued, they need to satisfy one of three conditions:
 
■
The countries must experience similar shocks. We just saw the rationale for this. If 
they experience similar shocks, they would have chosen roughly the same monetary 
policy anyway.
 
■
Or, if the countries experience different shocks, prices and wages must be very flexible, 
so that, if a country needs to regain competitiveness, it can do so by decreasing prices 
relative to other members, despite the fact that it cannot use the exchange rate.
 
■
Or, if the countries experience different shocks, they must have high factor mobility. 
For example, if workers are willing to move from countries that are doing poorly to 
countries that are doing well, factor mobility rather than macroeconomic policy can 
allow countries to adjust to shocks. When the unemployment rate is high in a coun-
try, workers leave that country to take jobs elsewhere and the unemployment rate 
in that country decreases back to normal. If the unemployment rate is low, workers 
come to the country and the unemployment rate in the country increases back to 
normal. The exchange rate is not needed.
Following Mundell’s analysis, most economists believe, for example, that the com-
mon currency area composed of the 50 states of the United States is close to an optimal 
currency area. True, the first condition is not satisfied; individual states suffer from differ-
ent shocks. California is more affected by shifts in demand from Asia than the rest of the 
United States. Texas is more affected by what happens to the price of oil, and so on. But 
the third condition is largely satisfied. There is considerable labor mobility across states. 
When a state does poorly, workers leave that state; when it does well, workers come to 
that state. State unemployment rates quickly return to normal, not because of state-level 
macroeconomic policy but because of labor mobility.
Clearly, there are also many advantages of using a common currency. For firms and 
consumers in the United States, the benefits of having a common currency are obvious; 
imagine how complicated life would be if you had to change currency every time you crossed 
a state line. The benefits go beyond these lower transaction costs. When prices are quoted in 
the same currency, it becomes much easier for buyers to compare prices and competition 
between firms increases, benefiting consumers. Given these benefits and the limited macro-
economic costs, it makes good sense for the United States to have a single currency.
In adopting the euro, Europe made the same choice as the United States. When the pro-
cess of conversion from national currencies to the euro ended in early 2002, the euro became 
the common currency for 11 European countries. (See the Focus Box “The Euro: A Short 
History.”) The count of countries using the euro at time of writing is now 19. Is the economic 
argument for this new common currency area as compelling as it is for the United States?
There is little question that a common currency yields for Europe many of the same 
benefits that it has for the United States. A report by the European Commission estimates 
This is the same Mundell 
who put together the 
Mundell-Fleming model you 
saw in Chapter 19.
b
Each US state could have 
its own currency that freely 
floated against other state 
currencies. But this is not the 
way things are. The United 
States is a common currency 
area with one currency, the 
US dollar.
b


=== PAGE 232 ===
432 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
that the elimination of foreign exchange transactions in the euro area leads to a reduc-
tion in costs of 0.5% of the combined GDP of these countries. There are also clear signs 
that the use of a common currency increases competition. When shopping for cars, for 
example, European consumers search for the lowest euro price anywhere in the euro area.
There is, however, much less agreement on whether Europe constitutes an optimal 
common currency area. This is because none of the three Mundell conditions appears to be 
satisfied. European countries experienced very different shocks in the past. Recall our dis-
cussion of Germany’s reunification and how differently it affected Germany and the other 
European countries in the 1990s. Prices and wages adjust very slowly. And labor mobility 
is very low in Europe and likely to remain low. Workers move much less within European 
countries than their counterparts do in a given US state. And because of language and cul-
tural differences among European countries, mobility between countries is even lower.
The worry that this might lead to long slumps in member countries if they were hit 
by a country-specific adverse shock was present even before the crisis. The crisis showed 
that the worry was well justified. Portugal, Greece, and Ireland, which had seen strong 
demand growth and large increases in current account deficits (see the Focus Box on 
current account deficits in Chapter 18), suddenly suffered a sharp decrease in spending, 
a sharp decrease in output, and increasing difficulty in financing their current account 
deficits. A large depreciation would have helped them increase demand and improve 
their current account, but with a common currency this could be done only through a 
decrease in prices relative to their euro partners. The result was a long and painful adjust-
ment process, which, at the time of writing, is far from over.
Figure 20-1 shows the evolution of unemployment and the real multilateral exchange 
rate for Spain. A boom from 1994 to 2007 led to a steady decrease in unemployment, but 
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
85.00
87.00
89.00
91.00
93.00
95.00
97.00
99.00
101.00
103.00
105.00
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Unemployment rate (percent) 
Real multilateral exchange rate
(index: 2010:100) 
Real multilateral exchange rate
(scale left)
Unemployment rate (scale right)
Figure 20-1
Evolution of the Unemployment Rate and the Real Exchange Rate in Spain since 1994
A boom from 1994 to 2007 led to lower unemployment and a real appreciation. In 2008, it turned into 
a bust, leading to a sharp increase in unemployment and a real depreciation.
Source: FRED: BESBIS, LRHUTTTTESM156S


=== PAGE 233 ===
 
Chapter 20 
Exchange Rate Regimes 
433
The Euro: A Short History
 
■
As the European Union (EU) celebrated its 30th anni-
versary in 1988, a number of governments decided the 
time had come to plan a move to a common currency. 
They asked Jacques Delors, president of the EU, to pre-
pare a report, which he presented in June 1989.
The Delors report suggested moving to a European 
Monetary Union (EMU) in three stages: Stage I was the 
abolition of capital controls. Stage II was the choice of 
fixed parities, to be maintained except for “exceptional 
circumstances.” Stage III was the adoption of a single 
currency.
 
■
Stage I was implemented in July 1990.
 
■
Stage II began in 1994, after the exchange rate crises of 
1992–1993 had subsided (see the Focus Box “The 1992 
EMS Crisis”). A minor but symbolic decision involved 
choosing the name of the new common currency. The 
French liked Ecu (European currency unit), which is 
also the name of an old French currency. But its part-
ners preferred euro, and the name was adopted in 1995.
 
■
In parallel, EU countries held referendums on whether 
they should adopt the Maastricht treaty. The treaty, 
negotiated in 1991, set three main conditions for join-
ing the EMU: low inflation, a budget deficit below 3%, 
and a public debt below 60%. The Maastricht treaty 
was not popular, and in many countries the outcome 
of the popular vote was close. In France, the treaty 
passed with only 51% of the votes. In Denmark, the 
treaty was rejected. The United Kingdom negotiated 
an “opt-out” clause that allowed Britain not to join the 
new currency union.
 
■
In the mid-1990s, it looked as if few European countries 
would satisfy the Maastricht conditions. But several coun-
tries took drastic measures to reduce their budget deficit. 
When the time came to decide, in May 1998, which 
countries would be members of the euro area, 11 coun-
tries made the cut: Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, 
Germany, Italy, Ireland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, 
Portugal, and Spain. The United Kingdom, Denmark, and 
Sweden decided to stay out. Greece did not qualify initially 
and didn’t join until 2001. (After it joined, it was revealed 
that it had “cooked the books” and understated the size of 
its budget deficit in order to qualify.) Since then, Cyprus, 
Estonia, Malta, Slovakia, and Slovenia have joined.
 
■
Stage III began in January 1999. Parities between the 
11 currencies and the euro were “irrevocably” fixed. 
The new European Central Bank (ECB) based in 
Frankfurt became responsible for monetary policy for 
the euro area.
From 1999 to 2002, the euro existed as a unit of account, 
but euro coins and bank notes did not exist. In effect, the euro 
area was still functioning as an area with fixed exchange rates. 
The next and final step was the introduction of euro coins and 
bank notes in January 2002. For the first few months of 2002, 
national currencies and the euro circulated side by side. Later 
in the year, national currencies were taken out of circulation.
Today, the euro is the only currency used in the euro area. 
The numbers of countries adopting the euro reached 19 
when Latvia and Lithuania joined.
For more on the euro, go to www.euro.ecb.int/. The Wikipedia 
page on the euro is also very good.
FOCUS
also a steady real appreciation. In 2008, the boom turned into a bust, with a sharp increase 
in unemployment until 2013, and a real depreciation. (You might wonder why the unem-
ployment rate continued to decline after real depreciation ended in 2015. This is due in part 
to an improvement in nonprice competitiveness and in part to stronger domestic demand.)
The challenge for the euro, looking forward, is whether such long slumps can be avoided 
in the future. Reforms are being explored to eliminate some of the factors that made the 
slump worse in those countries. A number of reforms are being put in place, from a bank-
ing union to a fiscal union, and they should allow countries to better resist adverse shocks. 
Whether these measures will be enough to be avoid crises in the future remains to be seen.
Hard Pegs, Currency Boards, and Dollarization
The second case for fixed exchange rates is different from the first. It is based on the argu-
ment that there may be times when a country may want to limit its ability to use mon-
etary policy.
Look at a country that has had very high inflation in the recent past—perhaps 
because it was unable to finance its budget deficit by any means other than money 
creation, resulting in high money growth and high inflation. Suppose the country 
decides to reduce money growth and inflation. One way to convince financial markets 
that it is serious about doing this is to fix its exchange rate. The need to use  monetary 
policy to maintain the parity then ties the hands of the monetary authority.
More on this in Chapter 21.
b


=== PAGE 234 ===
434 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Lessons from Argentina’s Currency Board
When Carlos Menem became President of Argentina in 
1989, he inherited an economic mess. Inflation was running 
at more than 30% per month. Output growth was negative.
Menem and his economy minister, Domingo Cavallo, 
quickly concluded that under these circumstances, the only 
way to bring money growth—and by implication, inflation—
under control was to peg the peso (Argentina’s currency) to 
the US dollar and to do this through a hard peg. So in 1991, 
Cavallo announced that Argentina would adopt a currency 
board. The central bank would stand ready to exchange 
pesos for dollars on demand. Furthermore, it would do so at 
the highly symbolic rate of one dollar for one peso.
Both the creation of a currency board and the choice of a 
symbolic exchange rate had the same objectives: to convince 
investors that the government was serious about the peg, to 
make it more difficult for future governments to give up the par-
ity and devalue, and, by thus making the fixed exchange rate 
more credible, to decrease the risk of a foreign exchange crisis.
For a while, the currency board appeared to work extremely 
well. Inflation, which had exceeded 2,300% in 1990, was 
down to 4% by 1994! This was clearly the result of the tight 
constraints the currency board put on money growth. Even 
more impressive, the collapse in inflation was accompanied by 
strong output growth: it averaged 5% per year from 1991 to 
1999.
Beginning in 1999, however, growth turned negative 
and Argentina went into a long and deep recession. Was the 
recession the result of the currency board? Yes and no:
 
■
Throughout the second half of the 1990s, the dollar 
steadily appreciated relative to the other major world 
currencies. Because the peso was pegged to the dollar, 
the peso also appreciated. By the late 1990s, it was clear 
that the peso was overvalued, leading to a decrease in 
demand for goods from Argentina, a decline in output, 
and an increase in the trade deficit.
 
■
Was the currency board fully responsible for the reces-
sion? No; there were other causes. But the currency 
board made it much harder to fight it. Lower interest 
rates and a depreciation of the peso would have helped 
the economy recover, but under the currency board, 
this was not an option.
In 2001, the economic crisis turned into both a financial 
and an exchange rate crisis, along the lines we described in 
Section 20-2:
 
■
Because of the recession, Argentina’s fiscal deficit had 
increased, leading to an increase in government debt. 
Worried that the government might default on its debt, 
financial investors started asking for very high interest 
rates on government bonds, making the fiscal deficit 
even larger and further increasing the risk of default.
 
■
Worried that Argentina would abandon the currency 
board and devalue to fight the recession, investors 
started asking for very high interest rates in pesos, 
making it more costly for the government to sustain the 
parity with the dollar, and so making it more likely that 
the currency board would indeed be abandoned.
In December 2001, the government defaulted on part of 
its debt. In early 2002, it gave up the currency board and let 
the peso float. The peso sharply depreciated, reaching 3.75 
pesos for 1 dollar by June 2002! People and firms that, given 
their earlier confidence in the peg, had borrowed in dollars 
found themselves with a large increase in the value of their 
dollar debts in terms of pesos. Many firms went bankrupt. 
The banking system collapsed. Despite the sharp real depre-
ciation, which should have helped exports, GDP in Argentina 
fell by 11% in 2002, and unemployment increased to nearly 
20%. Output growth turned positive in 2003, but it took 
until 2005 for GDP to reach its 1998 level again.
Does this mean that the currency board was a bad idea? 
Economists still disagree:
 
■
Some economists argue that it was a good idea but that 
it did not go far enough. They contend that Argentina 
should have simply dollarized (i.e., adopted the dollar 
outright as its currency and eliminated the peso alto-
gether). Eliminating the domestic currency would have 
eliminated the risk of a devaluation. The lesson, they 
say, is that even a currency board does not provide a 
sufficiently hard peg for the exchange rate. Only dol-
larization will do.
 
■
Other (indeed, most) economists argue that the currency 
board might have been a good idea at the start, but that it 
should not have been kept in place for so long. Once infla-
tion was under control, Argentina should have moved 
from a currency board to a floating exchange rate regime. 
The problem is that Argentina kept the fixed parity with 
the dollar for too long, to the point that the peso became 
overvalued and an exchange rate crisis was inevitable.
The debate about “fix versus flex,” soft pegs, hard pegs, 
currency boards, and common currencies is unlikely to be 
settled any time soon.
For a fascinating, fun, and opinionated book about Argentina’s 
crisis, read Paul Blustein’s And the Money Kept Rolling In (and 
Out): Wall Street, the IMF, and the Bankrupting of Argentina 
(Perseus Books Group, 2005).
FOCUS
To the extent that financial markets expect the parity to be maintained, they will stop 
worrying about money growth being used to finance the budget deficit.
Note the qualifier: “To the extent that financial markets expect the parity to be main-
tained.” Fixing the exchange rate is not a magic solution. The country also needs to 


=== PAGE 235 ===
convince financial investors that not only is the exchange rate fixed today, it will remain 
fixed in the future. There are two ways in which it can do so:
 
■
Make the fixed exchange rate part of a more general macroeconomic package. Fixing 
the exchange rate while continuing to run a large budget deficit will only convince 
financial markets that money growth will start again and that a devaluation is soon 
to come.
 
■
Make it symbolically or technically harder to change the parity, an approach known 
as a hard peg.
An extreme form of a hard peg is simply to replace the domestic currency with a 
foreign currency. Because the foreign currency chosen is typically the US dollar, this is 
known as dollarization. Few countries are willing, however, to give up their currency 
and adopt the currency of another country. A less extreme way is to use a  currency 
board. Under a currency board, a central bank stands ready to exchange foreign 
 currency for domestic currency at the official exchange rate set by the government. 
Furthermore—and this is the difference with a standard fixed exchange rate regime—
the central bank cannot engage in open market operations (that is, buy or sell govern-
ment bonds).
Perhaps the best-known example of a currency board is that adopted by Argentina 
in 1991 but abandoned in a crisis at the end of 2001. The story is told in the Focus Box 
“Lessons from Argentina’s Currency Board.” Economists differ on what conclusions one 
should draw from what happened in Argentina. Some conclude that currency boards 
are not hard enough: They do not prevent exchange rate crises. So if a country decides 
to adopt a fixed exchange rate, it should go all the way and dollarize. Others conclude 
that adopting a fixed exchange rate is a bad idea. If currency boards are used at all, they 
should be used only for a short period of time, until the central bank has reestablished its 
credibility and the country returns to a floating exchange rate regime.
When Israel was suffering 
from high inflation in the 
1980s, an Israeli finance min-
ister proposed such a mea-
sure as part of a stabilization 
program. His proposal was 
perceived as an attack on the 
sovereignty of Israel and he 
was fired.
b
SUMMARY
 
■Even under a fixed exchange rate regime, countries can 
adjust their real exchange rate in the medium run. They 
can do so by relying on adjustments in the price level. 
Nevertheless, the adjustment can be long and painful. 
Exchange rate adjustments can allow the economy to adjust 
faster and thus reduce the pain that comes from a long 
adjustment.
 
■Under fixed exchange rates, exchange rate crises typically 
start when participants in financial markets believe the 
currency may soon be devalued. Defending the parity then 
requires high interest rates, with potentially large adverse 
macroeconomic effects. These adverse effects may force the 
country to devalue, even if there were no initial plans for 
such a devaluation.
 
■The exchange rate today depends on both (1) the differ-
ence between current and expected future domestic inter-
est rates, and current and expected future foreign interest 
rates; and (2) the expected future exchange rate.
Any factor that increases current or expected future domestic 
interest rates leads to an increase in the exchange rate today.
Any factor that increases current or expected future foreign 
interest rates leads to a decrease in the exchange rate today.
Any factor that increases the expected future exchange rate 
leads to an increase in the exchange rate today.
 
■There is wide agreement among economists that flexible 
exchange regimes generally dominate fixed exchange rate 
regimes, except in two cases:
When a group of countries is highly integrated and forms 
an optimal currency area. (You can think of a common 
currency for a group of countries as an extreme form of 
fixed exchange rates among those countries.) For coun-
tries to form an optimal currency area, they must either 
face largely similar shocks or, if they experience different 
shocks, there must be either high wage and price flexibil-
ity or high labor mobility among them.
When a central bank cannot be trusted to follow a 
responsible monetary policy under flexible exchange 
rates. In this case, a strong form of fixed exchange rates, 
such as dollarization or a currency board, provides a way 
of tying the hands of the central bank.
 
Chapter 20 
Exchange Rate Regimes 
435


=== PAGE 236 ===
436 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
KEY TERMS
gold standard, 423
float, 424
optimal currency area, 431
Maastricht treaty, 433
European Central Bank (ECB), 433
hard peg, 435
dollarization, 435
currency board, 435
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using the information in this chapter, label each of the following 
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. If the nominal exchange rate is fixed, the real exchange 
rate is fixed.
b. When domestic inflation equals foreign inflation, the real 
exchange rate is fixed.
c. A devaluation is an increase in the nominal exchange rate.
d. Britain’s return to the gold standard caused years of high 
unemployment.
e. A sudden fear that a country is going to devalue leads to an 
increase in the domestic interest rate.
f. A change in the expected future exchange rate changes the 
current exchange rate.
g. The effect of a reduction in domestic interest rates on the 
exchange rate depends on the length of time domestic inter-
est rates are expected to be below foreign interest rates.
h. Because economies tend to return to their natural level of 
output in the medium run, it makes no difference whether 
a country chooses a fixed or flexible exchange rate.
i. High labor mobility within Europe makes the Euro area a 
good candidate for a common currency.
j. A currency board is the best way to operate a fixed 
exchange rate.
2. Consider a country operating under fixed exchange rates. The IS 
curve is given by equation (20.1)
Y = YaEQP
P *, G, T, i * - pe, Y *b
     
1-, +,  -,           - , + 2
a. Explain the term (i* - pe). Why does the foreign nominal 
interest rate appear in the relation?
b. Explain why when pe increases, the IS curve shifts left.
c. In the following table, how is the real exchange rate evolv-
ing from period 1 to period 5? What is domestic inflation? 
What is foreign inflation? Draw an IS-LM diagram with the 
IS curve in period 1 and the IS curve in period 5.
Period
P
P*
E
p
p* Real exchange rate e
1
100.0
100.0
0.5
2
103.0
102.0
0.5
3
106.1
104.0
0.5
4
109.3
106.1
0.5
5
112.6
108.2 0.5
d. In the following table, how is the real exchange rate evolv-
ing from period 1 to period 5? What is domestic inflation? 
What is foreign inflation? Draw an IS-LM diagram with 
the IS curve in period 1 and the IS curve in period 5.
Period
P
P*
E
p
p*
Real exchange rate e
1
100.0
100.0
0.5
2
102.0
103.0
0.5
3
104.0
106.1
0.5
4
106.1
109.3
0.5
5
108.2
112.6
0.5
e. In the table that follows, how is the real exchange rate 
evolving from period 1 to period 4? What is domestic infla-
tion? What is foreign inflation? What happened between 
Period 4 and Period 5? Draw an IS-LM  diagram with the IS 
curve in period 1 and the IS curve in period 5.
Period
P
P*
E
p
p*
Real exchange rate e
1
100.0
100.0
0.5
2
103.0
102.0
0.5
3
106.1
104.0
0.5
4
109.3
106.1
0.5
5
112.6
108.2
0.5
3. Policy choices when the real exchange rate is “too high” and the 
nominal exchange rate is fixed
An overvalued real exchange rate is a rate such that domestic 
goods are too expensive relative to foreign goods, net exports are 
too small, and by implication the demand for domestic goods is 
too low. This leads to difficult policy choices for the government 
and central bank. The equations (* denotes a value for the foreign 
 country) that describe the economy are:
The IS curve:
Y = YaEQP
P *, G, T, i * - pe, Y *b
     
1-, +,  -,            - ,  + 2
The Phillips curves for the domestic and the foreign economy:
Domestic Phillips curve    p - pQ = (a>L)(Y - Yn)
Foreign Phillips curve   p* - pQ * = 1a*>L*21Y * - Yn*2
In the text and in this question, we make two critical assumptions. 
These are explored in parts a and b. Then we move to the analysis 


=== PAGE 237 ===
 
Chapter 20 
Exchange Rate Regimes 
437
of the policy options when a country is experiencing an overvalued 
exchange rate.
a. We assume that the foreign economy is always in medium-
run equilibrium. What are the implications of that 
assumption for foreign output and foreign inflation?
b. We assume that the domestic and foreign economies share 
the same anchored value for the level of expected inflation 
denoted so that pQ  = pQ *. What is the implication of that 
assumption once both the domestic and foreign economies 
are both in medium-run equilibrium?
c. Draw the IS-LM-UIP diagram along the lines of Figure 19-2 
for the case where the domestic country has an overval-
ued nominal exchange rate. What is the key feature of that 
diagram? Under fixed exchange rates without a devalu-
ation, how does the economy return to its medium-run 
equilibrium?
d. Draw the IS-LM-UIP diagram for the case where the 
domestic country has an overvalued nominal exchange 
rate. Show how the economy can return to medium-run 
equilibrium when a devaluation is a policy choice.
e. Recall that the assumption has been made that interest rate 
parity holds, so i = i* at all times. Compare the returns on 
the domestic bond and the returns on the foreign bond in 
the period of the devaluation. Will bond holders continue to 
believe there is a completely fixed nominal exchange rate? 
If bond holders believe that another devaluation is possible, 
what are the consequences for domestic interest rates?
4. Modeling an exchange rate crisis
An exchange rate crisis occurs when the peg (the fixed 
exchange rate) loses its credibility. Bond holders no longer believe 
that next period’s exchange rate will be this period’s exchange rate. 
Period
it
i*t
Et
Ee
t + 1
1
3
0.5
0.5
2
3
0.5
0.45
3
3
0.5
0.45
4
3
0.5
0.5
5
15%
3
0.5
0.4
6
3
0.4
0.4
a. Solve the uncovered interest rate parity condition for the 
value of the domestic interest rate in period 1. (Use the 
approximate version of the uncovered interest parity 
relation in your calculations for all parts of this question 
below–equation 17.4).
b. In period 2, the crisis begins. Solve the uncovered interest 
rate parity condition for the value of the domestic interest 
rate in period 2.
c. The crisis continues in period 3. However, in period 4, the 
central bank and government resolve the crisis. How does 
this occur?
d. Unfortunately, in period 5, the crisis returns bigger and 
deeper than ever. Has the central bank raised interest rates 
enough to maintain uncovered interest rate parity? What are 
the consequences for the level of foreign exchange reserves?
e. How is the crisis resolved in period 6? Does this have impli-
cations for the future credibility of the central bank and 
the government?
5. Modeling the movements in the exchange rate
Equation (20.5) provides insight into the movements of 
nominal exchange rates between a domestic and a foreign country. 
Remember that the time periods in the equation can refer to any 
time unit. The equation is:
Et =
11 + it211 + ie
t + 12g11 + ie
t + n2
11 + it*211 + i*e
t + 12g11 + i*e
t + n2Ee
t + n + 1
a. Suppose we are thinking of one-day time periods. There are 
overnight (1-day) interest rates. How do we interpret a large 
movement in the exchange rate over the course of the day if 
we do not observe any change in the one-day interest rate?
b. We learned in Chapter 15 that a one-month (30- or 31-day 
interest rate) is the average of today’s one-day rate and the 
expected one-day rates over the next 30 days. This will be 
true in both countries. The following headline is observed on 
February 1: “ECB predicted to cut interest rates February 14, 
dollar rises.” Does the headline make sense?
c. We learned in Chapter 15 that a two-year bond yield is the 
average of today’s one-year interest rate and the expected one-
year rate one year from now. This will be true in both coun-
tries. The following headline is observed on February 1: “Fed 
announces that interest rates will remain low for the foresee-
able future, dollar falls.” Does the headline make sense?
d. The current account is this period’s lending to (if posi-
tive) or borrowing from (if negative) the rest of the world. 
Assume the current account is more negative than 
expected and this is surprising news. Explain why the 
exchange rate would depreciate on this surprising news.
DIG DEEPER
6. Realignments of exchange rate
Look at Figure 1 in the box “The 1992 EMS Crisis.” 
European nominal exchange rates had been fixed between the major 
currencies from roughly 1979 to 1992.
a. Explain how to read the vertical axis of Figure 1. What 
country experienced the largest depreciation? What coun-
try clearly experienced the smallest depreciation?
b. If two-year nominal interest rates in France and Italy had 
been similar in January 1992, which country would have 
generated the highest return on a two-year bond?
c. If the changes in the nominal exchange rates returned 
countries to medium-run equilibrium, which countries 
had the largest overvaluations in 1992?
7. Real and nominal exchange rates for Canada and Mexico
Two of the largest trading partners of the United States are 
Canada and Mexico. The FRED database at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of St. Louis maintains four series that are useful to us: A Real Broad 
Effective Exchange rate for Mexico (RBMXBIS); A Real Broad Effective 
Exchange rate for Canada (RBCABIS); the nominal exchange rate of 
Mexican pesos per U.S. dollar (EXMSUS); and the number of Canadian 
dollars per US dollar (EXCAUS). Download all the series monthly and 
organize to a spreadsheet where the start period is January 1994.


=== PAGE 238 ===
438 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
a. The exchange rate in FRED is defined as the number of 
Mexican pesos and the number of Canadian dollars per US 
dollar. Redefine them as the number of US cents per peso 
and the number of US cents per Canadian dollar. Why did 
you do that?
b. Make a time series graph of the redefined Mexican–US nom-
inal exchange rate and the broad real exchange rate index, 
RBMXBIS, from 1994 to the end of your data. Do you see a 
period where the nominal exchange rate is pegged? When 
the peg was released, did the peso appreciate or depreciate? 
Is there a period where the peso is appreciating in nominal 
terms and depreciating in real terms? Around what year did 
the real exchange rate index take its highest value? What is 
the behavior of the peso in real terms from its peak to 2018? 
How did that behavior impact the Mexican economy?
c. Make a time series graph of the redefined Canadian-US 
nominal exchange rate and the broad real exchange rate 
index, RBCABIS. Estimate the percentage fluctuation in the 
Canadian-US real exchange rate index from 1994 to the 
end of your data. Is there a period where the Canadian dol-
lar was pegged? Explain why the real exchange rate index 
tracks the nominal exchange rate closely in the Canadian–
US case. Would there have been any benefits to pegging the 
Canadian dollar to the US dollar over this period?
EXPLORE FURTHER
8. Exchange rates and expectations
In this chapter, we emphasized that expectations have an 
important effect on the exchange rate. In this problem, we use data to 
get a sense of how large a role expectations play. Using the results in 
Appendix 2 at the end of this chapter, you can show that the uncov-
ered interest parity condition, equation (20.4), can be rewritten as
(Et - Et - 1)
Et - 1
≈(it - i*t ) - (it - 1 - i*t - 1) + (Ee
t - Ee
t - 1)
Ee
t - 1
In words, the percentage change in the exchange rate (the 
appreciation of  the domestic currency) is approximately equal to 
the change in the interest rate differential (between domestic and 
foreign interest rates) plus the percentage change in exchange rate 
expectations (the appreciation of  the expected domestic currency 
value). We shall call the interest rate differential the spread.
a. Go to the Web site of the Bank of Canada (www.bank-
banque-canada.ca) and obtain data on the monthly one-
year Treasury bill rate in Canada for the past 10 years. 
Download the data into a spreadsheet. Now go to the Web 
site of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (research. 
stlouisfed.org/fred2) and download data on the monthly US 
one-year Treasury bill rate for the same time period. (You 
may need to look under “Constant Maturity” Treasury secu-
rities rather than “Treasury Bills.”) For each month, subtract 
the Canadian interest rate from the US interest rate to calcu-
late the spread. Then, for each month, calculate the change 
in the spread from the preceding month. (Make sure to con-
vert the interest rate data into the proper decimal form.)
b. At the Web site of the St. Louis Fed, obtain data on the 
monthly exchange rate between the US dollar and the 
Canadian dollar for the same period as your data from 
part a. Again, download the data into a spreadsheet. 
Calculate the percentage appreciation of the US dollar 
for each month. Using the standard deviation function 
in your software, calculate the standard deviation of the 
monthly appreciation of the US dollar. The standard devi-
ation is a measure of the variability of a data series.
c. For each month, subtract the change in the spread (part 
a) from the percentage appreciation of the dollar (part b). 
Call this difference the change in expectations. Calculate the 
standard deviation of the change in expectations. How 
does it compare to the standard deviation of the monthly 
appreciation of the dollar?
This exercise is too simple. Still, the gist of this analysis 
survives in more sophisticated work. In the short run, move-
ments in short-term interest rates do not account for much of the 
change in the exchange rate. Most of the changes in the exchange 
rate must be attributed to changing expectations.
9. Real and nominal exchange rates between China and the  
United States
a. Download the series EXCHUS from the FRED database. This 
expresses the exchange rate between the yuan (one of the 
names for the Chinese currency) as the number of yuan 
per US dollar. Convert that exchange rate to the number 
of US cents per yuan so that we are treating China as the 
domestic country. Are there periods after 1994 where 
China maintains a fixed exchange rate?
b. Download the series RBCNBIS. This is a real exchange 
rate index for China that can be interpreted as the value 
of e = EP/P* for China. Is the value of the real exchange 
rate fixed during the period where the nominal exchange 
rate is fixed? Over that period, how did the value of the real 
exchange rate affect aggregate demand in China?
c. From July 2007 to June 2010, the value of the yuan was 
very close to 14.6 US cents. This was a second period of fixed 
exchange rates. Can you find any evidence from the move-
ments of the nominal and real exchange rate after June 2010 
that suggest that China chose a lower value of the yuan to 
encourage Chinese exports and reduce Chinese imports?
FURTHER READINGS
 
■For an early skeptical view of the euro, read Martin Feldstein, 
“The European Central Bank and the Euro: The First Year,” 
2000, www.nber.org/papers/w7517, and “The Euro and the 
Stability Pact,” 2005, www.nber.org/papers/w11249.
Two good books on the euro crisis (the second one is very 
critical of the euro in general):
 
■Jean Pisani-Ferry, The Euro Crisis and Its Aftermath, Oxford 
University Press, 2014.
 
■Ashoka Mody, Euro-Tragedy: A Drama in Nine Acts, Oxford 
University Press, 2018.


=== PAGE 239 ===
 
Chapter 20 
Exchange Rate Regimes 
439
APPENDIX 1:  Deriving the IS Relation under Fixed Exchange 
Rates
Start from the condition for goods market equilibrium we 
derived in Chapter 19, equation (19.1):
Y = C(Y - T) + I(Y, r) + G + NX(Y, Y *, e)
This condition states that, for the goods market to be in 
equilibrium, output must be equal to the demand for domes-
tic goods—that is, the sum of consumption, investment, gov-
ernment spending, and net exports. Next, recall the following 
relations:
 
■The real interest rate, r, is equal to the nominal interest rate, 
i, minus expected inflation, pe (see Chapter 14):
r K i - pe
 
■The real exchange rate, e, is defined as (see Chapter 17):
e = EP
P*
 
■Under fixed exchange rates, the nominal exchange rate, E, 
is, by definition, fixed. Denote by EQ the value at which the 
nominal exchange rate is fixed, so:
E = EQ
 
■Under fixed exchange rates and perfect capital mobility, the 
domestic interest rate, i, must be equal to the foreign interest 
rate, i* (see Chapter 17):
i = i*
Using these four relations, rewrite equation (20.1) as:
Y = C(Y - T) + I(Y, i* - pe) + G + NXaY, Y *, EQP
P* b
This can be rewritten, using a more compact notation, as:
Y = YaEQP
P*, G, T, i* - pe, Y*b
1- , +, -,           -,  +2
which is equation (20.1) in the text.
APPENDIX 2:  The Real Exchange Rate and Domestic  
and Foreign Real Interest Rates
We derived in Section 20-3 a relation among the current nomi-
nal exchange rate, current and expected future domestic and 
foreign nominal interest rates, and the expected future nominal 
exchange rate (equation (20.5)). This appendix derives a similar 
relation, but in terms of real interest rates and the real exchange 
rate. It then briefly discusses how this alternative relation can be 
used to think about movements in the real exchange rate.
Deriving the Real Interest Parity Condition
Start from the nominal interest parity condition, equation (19.3):
(1 + it) = (1 + it*)( Et
Ee
t + 1
)
Recall the definition of the real interest rate from Chapter 6, 
equation (6.3):
(1 + rt) =
(1 + it)
(1 + pe
t + 1)
where pe
t + 1 K (Pe
t + 1 - Pt)>Pt is the expected rate of inflation. 
Similarly, the foreign real interest rate is given by:
(1 + rt*) =
(1 + it*)
(1 + p*e
t + 1)
where p*e
t + 1 K 1P*e
t + 1 - Pt*2>Pt* is the expected foreign rate of 
inflation.
Use these two relations to eliminate nominal interest rates 
in the interest parity condition, so:
 
(1 + rt) = (1 + r*t )c Et
Ee
t + 1
(1 + p*e
t + 1)
(1 + pe
t + 1) d  
(20.A1)
Note from the definition of inflation that 11 + pt + 1
e
2  =  
Pt + 1
e
>Pt and, similarly, (1 + p*e
t + 1) = P*e
t + 1>P*t.
Using these two relations in the term in brackets gives:
Et
Et + 1
e
 
11 + p*e
t + 12
11 + pt + 1
e
2 =
Et
Et + 1
e
 P*e
t + 1 Pt
Pt* Pt + 1
e
Reorganizing terms:
Et P*e
t + 1 Pt
Ee
t + 1P*t P e
t + 1
=
Et Pt>P*t
Ee
t + 1P e
t + 1>P*e
t + 1
Using the definition of the real exchange rate:
EtP>Pt*
Ee
t + 1Pe
t + 1>P*e
t + 1
=
et
ee
t + 1


=== PAGE 240 ===
440 
The Open Economy 
Extensions
Replacing in equation (20.A1) gives:
(1 + rt) = (1 + rt*) et
ee
t + 1
or equivalently,
 
et = 1 + rt
1 + rt* ee
t + 1 
(20.A2)
The real exchange rate today depends on the domestic 
and foreign real interest rates this year and the expected future 
real exchange rate next year. This equation corresponds to 
equation (20.4) in the text, but now in terms of the real rather 
than nominal exchange and interest rates.
Solving the Real Interest Parity Condition Forward
The next step is to solve equation (20.A2) forward, in the 
same way we did for equation (20.4). The equation above 
implies that the real exchange rate in year t + 1 is given by:
et + 1 = 1 + re
t + 1
1 + r*e
t + 1
 ee
t + 2
Taking expectations as of year t:
ee
t + 1 = 1 + re
t + 1
1 + r*e
t + 1
 ee
t + 2
Replacing in the previous relation:
et = (1 + rt)  (1 + re
t + 1)
(1 + r*t)  (1 + r*e
t + 1) ee
t + 2
Solving for ee
t + 2 and so on gives:
et = (1 + rt)
(1 + rt*)
(1 + re
t + 1)g(1 + re
t + n)
(1 + r*e
t + 1)(1 + r*e
t + n)  ee
t + n + 1
This relation gives the current real exchange rate as a func-
tion of current and expected future domestic real interest rates, 
of current and expected future foreign real interest rates, and 
the expected real exchange rate in year t + n.
The advantage of this relation over the relation we 
derived in the text between the nominal exchange rate and 
nominal interest rates (equation (20.5)) is that it is typi-
cally easier to predict the future real exchange rate than to 
predict the future nominal exchange rate. If, for example, the 
economy suffers from a large trade deficit, we can be fairly 
confident that there will have to be a real depreciation—that 
ee
t + n will have to be lower. Whether there will be a nomi-
nal  depreciation—what happens to Ee
t + n—is harder to tell. 
It depends on what happens to inflation, both at home and 
abroad, over the next n years.


=== PAGE 241 ===
461
Fiscal Policy:  
A Summing Up
T
he financial crisis and the Great Recession led to large budget deficits, and these 
have resulted in a large increase in debt-to-GDP ratios. The debt-to-GDP ratio, 
which stood at 73% in advanced countries in 2007, was 104% in 2018. In some 
countries, it was much higher: 130% in Italy, 188% in Greece, 240% in Japan. 
A major macroeconomic question confronting governments is whether these ratios should 
be reduced and, if so, at what speed.
The purpose of this chapter is to review what we have learned about fiscal policy so 
far, to explore in more depth the dynamics of deficits and debt, to discuss the costs of high 
debt, and to give a tentative answer to the question in the opening paragraph.
Section 22-1 takes stock of what we have learned about fiscal policy so far.
Section 22-2 looks more closely at the government budget constraint and examines its 
implications for the relation between budget deficits, the interest rate, the growth rate, 
and government debt.
Section 22-3 takes up three issues for which the government budget constraint plays 
a central role, from the proposition that deficits do not really matter, to how to run fiscal 
policy in the cycle, to whether to finance wars through taxes or through debt.
Section 22-4 discusses the dangers associated with high government debt, from higher 
taxes to higher interest rates, default, and high inflation.
Section 22-5 looks at the challenges facing US fiscal policy today.
22
If you remember one basic message from this chapter, it should be: Fiscal policy 
can be a strong macroeconomic policy tool. When using it, one must think about 
both its short-, medium-, and long-run effects. 


=== PAGE 242 ===
462 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
22-1  WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED
Let’s review what we have learned so far about fiscal policy:
 
■
In Chapter 3, we looked at how government spending and taxes affected demand 
and, in turn, output in the short run.
We saw that, in the short run, a fiscal expansion—increases in government 
spending or decreases in taxes—increases output.
 
■
In Chapter 5, we looked at the short-run effects of fiscal policy on output and on the 
interest rate.
We saw that a fiscal contraction leads to lower disposable income, which causes 
people to decrease their consumption. This decrease in demand leads, through a 
multiplier, to a decrease in output and income. At a given policy rate, the fiscal 
contraction leads therefore to a decrease in output. A decrease in the policy rate 
by the central bank can, however, potentially offset the adverse effects of the fiscal 
contraction.
 
■
In Chapter 6, we saw how fiscal policy was used during the financial crisis to limit 
the fall in output.
We saw that when the economy is in a liquidity trap, a reduction in the interest 
rate can no longer be used to increase output, and thus fiscal policy has an important 
role to play. Large increases in spending and cuts in taxes, however, were not enough 
to avoid the recession.
 
■
In Chapter 9, we looked at the effects of fiscal policy in the short run and in the 
medium run.
We saw that, in the medium run (that is, taking the capital stock as given), a fis-
cal consolidation has no effect on output but is reflected in a different composition of 
spending. In the short run, however, output decreases. In other words, if output was 
at potential to start with, the fiscal consolidation, as desirable as it may be on other 
grounds, initially leads to a recession.
 
■
In Chapter 11, we looked at how saving, both private and public, affects the level of 
capital accumulation and the level of output in the long run.
We saw that, once capital accumulation is taken into account, a larger budget 
deficit, and by implication a lower national saving rate, decreases capital accumula-
tion, leading to a lower level of output in the long run.
 
■
In Chapter 16, we returned to the short-run effects of fiscal policy, considering not 
only fiscal policy’s direct effects through taxes and government spending, but also its 
effects on expectations.
We saw that the effects of fiscal policy depend on expectations of future fiscal 
and monetary policy. We saw that a deficit reduction may, in some circumstances, 
lead to an increase in output even in the short run, thanks to people’s expectations 
of higher future disposable income.
 
■
In Chapter 18, we looked at the effects of fiscal policy when the economy is open in 
the goods market.
We saw that fiscal policy affects both output and the trade balance, and we 
examined the relation between the budget deficit and the trade deficit.
 
■
In Chapter 19, we looked at the role of fiscal policy in an economy open in both goods 
markets and financial markets.
We saw that the effects of fiscal policy depend on the exchange rate regime. 
Fiscal policy is likely to have a stronger effect on output under fixed exchange rates 
than under flexible exchange rates.
 
■
In Chapter 21, we looked at the problems facing policymakers in general, from 
uncertainty about the effects of policy to issues of time consistency and credibility. 


=== PAGE 243 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
463
We looked at the pros and cons of putting restraints on the conduct of fiscal policy, 
from spending caps to a constitutional amendment to balance the budget.
In deriving these conclusions, we did not pay close attention to the government bud-
get constraint—that is, the relation among debt, deficits, spending, and taxes over time. 
This relation is important, however, in understanding both how we got to where we are 
today and the choices faced by policymakers. It is the focus of the next section.
22-2 THE GOVERNMENT BUDGET CONSTRAINT: 
DEFICITS, DEBT, SPENDING, AND TAXES
Suppose that, starting from a balanced budget, the government decreases taxes, creating 
a budget deficit. What will happen to the debt over time? Will the government need to 
increase taxes later? If so, by how much?
The Arithmetic of Deficits and Debt
To answer these questions, we must begin with a definition of the budget deficit. We can 
write the budget deficit in year t as:
 
deficitt = rBt - 1 + Gt - Tt 
(22.1)
All variables are in real terms:
 
■
Bt - 1 is government debt at the end of year t - 1, or, equivalently, at the beginning 
of year t; r is the real interest rate, which we shall for now assume to be constant. 
Thus, rBt - 1 equals the real interest payments on the government debt in year t.
 
■
Gt is government spending on goods and services during year t.
 
■
Tt is taxes minus transfers during year t.
In words: The budget deficit equals spending, including interest payments on the 
debt, minus taxes net of transfers.
Note two characteristics of equation (22.1):
 
■
We measure interest payments as real interest payments—that is, the product of the 
real interest rate times existing debt—rather than as actual interest payments—that 
is, the product of the nominal interest rate and the existing debt. As the Focus Box 
“Inflation Accounting and the Measurement of Deficits” shows, this is the correct 
way of measuring interest payments. Official measures of the deficit, however, use 
actual (nominal) interest payments and are therefore incorrect. When inflation is 
high, official measures can be seriously misleading. The correct measure of the defi-
cit is sometimes called the inflation-adjusted deficit.
 
■
For consistency with our definition of G as spending on goods and services, G does not 
include transfer payments. Transfers are instead subtracted from T, so that T stands for 
taxes minus transfers. Official measures of government spending typically add transfers to 
spending on goods and services and define revenues as taxes, not taxes net of transfers.
 
■
These are only accounting conventions. Whether transfers are added to spending or 
subtracted from taxes makes a difference to the measurement of G and T, but clearly 
does not affect G - T, and therefore does not affect the measure of the deficit.
The government budget constraint then simply states that the change in govern-
ment debt during year t is equal to the deficit during year t:
Bt - Bt - 1 = deficitt
Do not confuse the words 
deficit and debt. (Many jour-
nalists and politicians do.) 
Debt is a stock—what the 
government owes as a result 
of past deficits. The deficit 
is a flow—how much the 
government borrows during a 
given year.
b
Transfer payments are gov-
ernment transfers to individu-
als, such as unemployment 
benefits or Medicare.
b
Let G represent government 
spending on goods and ser-
vices; Tr, transfers; and Tax, 
total taxes. For simplicity, 
assume interest payments rB 
equal zero. Then
Deficit = G + Tr - Tax
This can be rewritten in two 
(equivalent) ways:
Deficit = G - 1Tax - Tr2
The deficit equals spending 
on goods and services minus 
net taxes—that is, taxes 
minus transfers. This is the 
way we write it in the text. Or 
it can be written as:
Deficit = 1G + Tr2 - Tax
which is the way it is decom-
posed in official measures 
(see, for example, Table A1-4 
in Appendix 1 at the end of 
the book).
b


=== PAGE 244 ===
464 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
Inflation Accounting and the Measurement of Deficits
Official measures of the budget deficit are constructed (drop-
ping the time indexes, which are not needed here) as nominal 
interest payments, iB, plus spending on goods and services, 
G, minus taxes net of transfers, T:
official measure of the deficit = iB + G - T
This is an accurate measure of the cash flow position of 
the government. If it is positive, the government is spending 
more than it receives and must therefore issue new debt. If 
it is negative, the government buys back previously issued 
debt.
But this is not an accurate measure of the change in 
real debt—that is, the change in how much the government 
owes, expressed in terms of goods rather than dollars.
To see why, consider the following example: Suppose the 
official measure of the deficit is equal to zero, so the govern-
ment neither issues nor buys back debt. Suppose inflation is 
positive and equal to 10%. Then, at the end of the year, the 
real value of the debt has decreased by 10%. If we define—as 
we should—the deficit as the change in the real value of gov-
ernment debt, the government has decreased its real debt by 
10% over the year. In other words, it has in fact run a budget 
surplus equal to 10% times the initial level of debt.
More generally: If B is debt and p is inflation, the official 
measure of the deficit overstates the correct measure by an 
amount equal to pB. Put another way, the correct measure 
of the deficit is obtained by subtracting pB from the official 
measure:
correct measure of the deficit = iB + G - T - pB
= 1i - p2B + G - T
= rB + G - T
where r = i - p is the (realized) real interest rate. The cor-
rect measure of the deficit is equal to real interest payments 
plus government spending minus taxes net of transfers.
The difference between the official and the correct 
measures of the deficit equals pB. The higher the rate of 
inflation, p, or the higher the level of debt, B, the more 
inaccurate the official measure. In countries where both 
inflation and debt are high, the official measure may record 
a very large budget deficit, when in fact real government 
debt is decreasing. This is why you should always do the 
inflation adjustment before deriving conclusions about the 
position of fiscal policy.
Figure 1 plots the official measure and the inflation-
adjusted measure of the (federal) budget deficit for the United 
States as a percent of GDP since 1969. The official mea-
sure shows a deficit in every year from 1970 to 1997. The 
inflation-adjusted measure shows instead alternating deficits 
and surpluses until the late 1970s. Both measures, however, 
show that the deficit became much larger after 1980, that 
things improved in the 1990s, and that they have deterio-
rated in the 2000s. Today, with inflation running at about 
2% a year and the ratio of debt-to-GDP around 80%, the 
difference between the two measures is roughly equal to 2% 
times 80%, or 1.6% of GDP.
FOCUS
24
22
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
1969
1974
1979
1984
1989
1994
1999
2004
2009
2014
2019
Percent of GDP
Official Deficit
Inflation-Adjusted Deficit
Figure 1
Official and Inflation-Adjusted Federal Budget Deficits for the United States since 1969
Source: FRED: CPIAUCSL, and Tables B-18 and B-19 Economic Report of the President.


=== PAGE 245 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
465
If the government runs a deficit, government debt increases as the government borrows to 
fund the part of spending in excess of revenues. If the government runs a surplus, government 
debt decreases as the government uses the budget surplus to repay part of its outstanding debt.
Using the definition of the deficit (equation (22.1)), we can rewrite the government 
budget constraint as
 
Bt - Bt - 1 = rBt - 1 + Gt - Tt 
(22.2)
The government budget constraint links the change in government debt to the initial 
level of debt (which affects interest payments) and to current government spending and 
taxes. It is often convenient to decompose the deficit into the sum of two terms:
 
■
Interest payments on the debt, rBt - 1.
 
■
The difference between spending and taxes, Gt - Tt. This term is called the primary 
deficit (equivalently, Tt - Gt is called the primary surplus).
Using this decomposition, we can rewrite equation (22.2) as
Change in the Debt 
Interest Payments 
Primary Deficit
Bt - Bt - 1  =     rBt - 1    +     1Gt - Tt2
Or, moving Bt - 1 to the right side of the equation and reorganizing,
Primary Deficit
 
Bt = 11 + r2Bt - 1 +  1Gt - Tt2 
(22.3)
This relation states that the debt at the end of year t equals 11 + r2 times the debt at 
the end of year t - 1 plus the primary deficit during year t, (Gt - Tt). Let’s look at some 
of its implications. (In this section, I shall assume that the real interest rate is positive, so 
that, if the primary deficit is equal to zero, debt increases over time. This is not necessarily 
the case, and I shall return to the assumption later on.)
Current versus Future Taxes
Consider first a one-year decrease in taxes for the path of debt and future taxes. Start 
from a situation where, until year 1, the government has balanced its budget, so that 
initial debt is equal to zero. During year 1, the government decreases taxes by 1 (think 1 
billion dollars, for example) for one year. Thus, debt at the end of year 1, B1, is equal to 1. 
The question we take up: What happens thereafter?
Full Repayment in Year 2
Suppose the government decides to fully repay the debt during year 2. From 
equation (22.3), the budget constraint for year 2 is given by
B2 = 11 + r2B1 + 1G2 - T22
If the debt is fully repaid during year 2, then the debt at the end of year 2 is equal to 
zero, B2 = 0. Replacing B1 by 1 and B2 by 0 and transposing terms gives
T2 - G2 = 11 + r21 = 11 + r2
To repay the debt fully during year 2, the government must run a primary surplus 
equal to 11 + r2. It can do so in one of two ways: a decrease in spending or an increase 
in taxes. I shall assume here and in the rest of this section that the adjustment comes 
through taxes, so that the path of spending is unaffected. It follows that the decrease in 
taxes by 1 during year 1 must be offset by an increase in taxes by 11 + r2 during year 2.
v
V
v
v
Full repayment in year 2:
T1 decreases by 1 1
T2 increases by 11 + r2
b


=== PAGE 246 ===
466 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
The path of taxes and debt corresponding to this case is given in Figure 22-1(a): 
If the debt is fully repaid during year 2, the decrease in taxes of 1 in year 1 requires an 
increase in taxes equal to 11 + r2 in year 2.
Full Repayment in Year t
Now suppose the government decides to wait until year t to repay the debt. From year 2 to 
year t - 1 the primary deficit is equal to zero; taxes are equal to spending, not including 
interest payments on the debt.
During year 2, the primary deficit is zero. So, from equation (22.3), debt at the end 
of year 2 is:
B2 = 11 + r2B1 + 0 = 11 + r21 = 11 + r2
where the second equality uses the fact that B1 = 1.
With the primary deficit still equal to zero during year 3, debt at the end of year 3 is
B3 = 11 + r2B2 + 0 = 11 + r211 + r21 = 11 + r22
Solving for debt at the end of year 4 and so on, it is clear that as long as the government 
keeps a primary deficit equal to zero, debt grows at a rate equal to the interest rate, and thus 
debt at the end of year t - 1 is given by
 
Bt - 1 = 11 + r2t - 2 
(22.4)
Even though taxes are cut only in year 1, debt keeps increasing over time, at a rate 
equal to the interest rate. The reason is simple; although the primary deficit is equal to 
zero, debt is now positive, and so are interest payments on it. Each year, the government 
must issue more debt to pay the interest on existing debt.
In year t, the year in which the government decides to repay the debt, the budget 
constraint is
Bt = 11 + r2Bt - 1 + 1Gt - Tt2
(b) Debt Reimbursement in Year 5
Year
Taxes
End-of-year 
     debt
0
0
1
21
2
0
3
0
4
0
5
(11r)4
0
1
(11r)
(11r)2
(11r)3
0
(a) Debt Reimbursement in Year 2
Year
Taxes
End-of-year 
     debt
0
0
1
21
2
(11r)
3
0
4
0
5
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
(c) Debt Stabilization in Year 2
Year
Taxes
End-of-year 
    debt
0
0
1
21
2
r
3
r
4
r
5
r
0
1
1
1
1
1
Figure 22-1
Tax Cuts, Debt 
Repayment, and Debt 
Stabilization
(a) If the debt is fully repaid 
during year 2, the decrease 
in taxes of 1 in year 1 
requires an increase in taxes 
equal to 11 + r2 in year 2. 
(b) If the debt is fully repaid 
during year 5, the decrease 
in taxes of 1 in year 1 
requires an increase in taxes 
equal to 11 + r24 during year 
5. (c) If the debt is stabilized 
from year 2 on, then taxes 
must be permanently higher 
by r from year 2 on.


=== PAGE 247 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
467
If debt is fully repaid during year t, then Bt (debt at the end of year t) is zero. Replacing 
Bt by zero and Bt - 1 by its expression from equation (22.4) gives
0 = 11 + r211 + r2t - 2 + 1Gt - Tt2
Reorganizing and bringing 1Gt - Tt2 to the left side of the equation implies
Tt - Gt = 11 + r2t - 1
To repay the debt, the government must run a primary surplus equal to 11 + r2t - 1 
during year t. If the adjustment is done through taxes, the initial decrease in taxes of 1 
during year 1 leads to an increase in taxes of 11 + r2t - 1 during year t. The path of taxes 
and debt corresponding to the case where debt is repaid in year 5 is given in Figure 22-1(b).
This example yields our first set of conclusions:
 
■
If government spending is unchanged, a decrease in taxes must eventually be offset 
by an increase in taxes in the future.
 
■
The longer the government waits to increase taxes, or the higher the real interest rate 
is, the higher the eventual increase in taxes must be.
Debt Stabilization in Year 2
We have assumed so far that the government fully repays the debt. Let’s now look at what 
happens to taxes if the government only stabilizes the debt. (Stabilizing the debt means 
changing taxes or spending so that debt remains constant from then on.)
Suppose the government decides to stabilize the debt from year 2 on: the debt at the 
end of year 2 and thereafter remains at the same level as at the end of year 1.
From equation (22.3), the budget constraint for year 2 is
B2 = 11 + r2B1 + 1G2 - T22
Under our assumption that debt is stabilized in year 2, B2 = B1 = 1. Setting 
B2 = B1 = 1 in the preceding equation yields
1 = 11 + r2 + 1G2 - T22
Reorganizing and bringing 1G2 - T22 to the left side of the equation,
T2 - G2 = 11 + r2 - 1 = r
To avoid a further increase in debt during year 2, the government must run a pri-
mary surplus equal to real interest payments on the existing debt (recall our assumption 
that the real interest rate is positive). It must do so in each of the following years as well. 
Each year, the primary surplus must be sufficient to cover interest payments, leaving 
the debt level unchanged. The path of taxes and debt is shown in Figure 22-1(c). Debt 
remains equal to 1 from year 1 on. Taxes are permanently higher from year 2 on, by an 
amount equal to r; equivalently, from year 2 on, the government runs a primary surplus 
equal to r.
The logic of this argument extends directly to the case where the government waits 
until year t to stabilize the debt. Whenever the government stabilizes, it must, each year 
from then on, run a primary surplus sufficient to pay the interest on the debt.
This example yields our second set of conclusions:
 
■
The legacy of past deficits is higher government debt today.
 
■
To stabilize the debt, the government must eliminate the deficit.
 
■
To eliminate the deficit, and if the interest rate is positive, the government must run 
a primary surplus equal to the interest payments on the existing debt. This requires 
higher taxes forever.
Add exponents: 11 + r2 
11 + r2t - 2 = 11 + r2t - 1.
See Appendix 2 at the end of 
this book.
b
Fu ll repayment in year 5:  
T1 decreases by 1 1   
T5 increases by 11 + r24
b
Stabilizing the debt from  
year 2 on:
T1 decreases by 1 1  
T2, T3,cincrease by r
b


=== PAGE 248 ===
468 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
The Evolution of the Debt-to-GDP Ratio
We have focused so far on the evolution of the level of debt. But in an economy in which 
output grows over time, it makes more sense to focus instead on the ratio of debt to output.
To see how this change in focus modifies our conclusions, we need to go from equa-
tion (22.3) to an equation that gives the evolution of the debt-to-GDP ratio—the debt 
ratio for short.
Deriving the evolution of the debt ratio takes a few steps. Do not worry; the final 
equation is easy to understand.
First divide both sides of equation (22.3) by real output, Yt,  to get
Bt
Yt
= 11 + r2Bt - 1
Yt
+ Gt - Tt
Yt
Next rewrite Bt - 1>Yt  as 1Bt - 1>Yt - 12 1Yt - 1>Yt2  (in other words, multiply the 
numerator and the denominator by Yt - 1):
Bt
Yt
= 11 + r2a Yt - 1
Yt
b Bt - 1
Yt - 1
+ Gt - Tt
Yt
Note that all the terms in the equation are now in terms of ratios to output, Y. To 
simplify this equation, assume that output growth is constant and denote the growth 
rate of output by g, so Yt - 1>Yt  can be written as 1>11 + g2. And use the approximation 
11 + r2>11 + g2 ≈1 + r - g.
Using these two assumptions, rewrite the preceding equation as
Bt
Yt
= 11 + r - g2Bt - 1
Yt - 1
+ Gt - Tt
Yt
Finally, reorganize to get
 
Bt
Yt
- Bt - 1
Yt - 1
= 1r - g2Bt - 1
Yt - 1
+ Gt - Tt
Yt
 
(22.5)
This took many steps, but the final relation has a simple interpretation.
The change in the debt ratio over time (the left side of the equation) is equal to the sum 
of two terms:
 
■
The first term is the difference between the real interest rate and the growth rate, 
times the initial debt ratio.
 
■
The second term is the ratio of the primary deficit to GDP.
Compare equation (22.5), which gives the evolution of the ratio of debt to GDP, to 
equation (22.2), which gives the evolution of the level of debt itself. Assume that the pri-
mary deficit (and therefore the ratio of the primary deficit to GDP is equal to zero. Then, 
whether debt increases or decreases depends on whether the interest rate is positive or 
not. However, whether the debt-to-GDP ratio increases or decreases depends on whether 
the interest rate is larger or smaller than the growth rate. (More on this in Section 22-5.)
Equation (22.5) implies that the increase in the ratio of debt to GDP will be larger:
 
■
the higher the real interest rate,
 
■
the lower the growth rate of output,
 
■
the higher the initial debt ratio,
 
■
the higher the ratio of the primary deficit to GDP.
Start from Yt = 11 + g2Yt - 1. 
Divide both sides by Yt to 
get 1 = 11 + g2Yt - 1>Yt. 
Reorganize to get 
Yt - 1>Yt = 1>11 + g2.
This approximation is derived 
as proposition 6 in Appen-
dix 2 at the end of this book.
c
If two variables (here debt 
and GDP) grow at rates r 
and g respectively, then their 
ratio (here the ratio of debt 
to GDP) will grow at rate 
r - g. See proposition 8 in 
Appendix 2  at the end of 
this book.
c


=== PAGE 249 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
469
Building on this relation, the Focus Box “How Countries Decreased Their Debt Ratios 
after World War II” shows how governments that inherited high debt ratios at the end of 
the war steadily decreased them through a combination of low real interest rates, high 
growth rates, and primary surpluses. The next section shows how our analysis can also 
be used to shed light on a number of other fiscal policy issues.
How Countries Decreased Their Debt Ratios after 
World War II
After World War II, many countries had high debt ratios, 
often in excess of 100% of GDP. Yet, two or three decades 
later, the debt ratios were much lower, often below 50%. 
(We saw in Chapter 21 that this was the case for the United 
States.) How did they do it? The answer is given in Table 1.
Table 1 looks at four countries: Australia, Canada, New 
Zealand, and the United Kingdom. Column 1 gives the period 
during which debt ratios decreased. The first year is either 
1945 or 1946. The last year is the year in which the debt 
ratio reached its lowest point; the period of adjustment varies 
from 13 years in Canada to 30 years in the United Kingdom. 
Column 2 gives debt ratios at the start and at the end of the 
period. The most striking numbers are those for the United 
Kingdom: an initial debt ratio of 270% of GDP in 1946 and 
an impressive decline to 47% in 1974.
To interpret the numbers in the table, go back to equa-
tion (22.5). It tells us that there are two, not mutually exclu-
sive, ways in which a country can reduce its debt ratio. The first 
is through high primary surpluses. Suppose, for example, that 
1r - g2 was equal to 0. Then the decrease in the debt ratio over 
some period would just be the sum of the ratios of primary sur-
pluses to GDP over the period. The second is through a low 1r - g2, 
through either low real interest rates or high growth, or both.
With this in mind, columns 3 to 5 give the average ratio 
of the primary balance to GDP, average growth rate of GDP, 
and average real interest rate over the relevant period.
Look first at primary balances in column 3. All four coun-
tries ran primary surpluses on average over the period. But 
note that these primary surpluses account only for a small 
part of the decline in the debt ratio. Look, for example, at the 
United Kingdom. The sum of the ratios of the primary sur-
pluses to GDP over the period is equal to 2.1% multiplied by 
30 = 63% of GDP, accounting for less than a third of the 
decline in the debt ratio, 223% 1270% - 47%2 of GDP.
Now look at the growth rates and real interest rates in 
columns 4 and 5. Note how high growth rates and how low 
real interest rates were during the period. Take Australia, for 
example. The average value of 1r - g2 during the period 
was -6.9% 1-2.3% - 4.6%2. This implies that, even if the 
primary balance had been equal to zero, the debt ratio would 
have declined each year by 6.9%. In other words, the decline 
in debt was mainly the result not of primary surpluses but 
of sustained high growth and sustained negative real inter-
est rates.
This leads to a final question: Why were real interest 
rates so low? The answer is given in column 6. During the 
period, average inflation was relatively high. This inflation, 
combined with consistently low nominal interest rates, 
is what accounts for the negative real interest rates. Put 
another way, a large part of the decrease in debt ratios was 
achieved by paying bond holders a negative real return on 
their bonds for many years.
FOCUS
1
2
3
4
5
6
Country
Start/End 
Year
Start/End 
Debt Ratio
Primary 
Balance
Growth 
Rate
Real Interest 
Rate
Inflation 
Rate
Australia
1946–1963
92–29
1.1
4.6
- 2.3
5.7
Canada
1945–1957
115–59
3.6
4.3
- 1.4
4.0
New Zealand
1946–1974
148–41
2.3
3.9
- 2.9
4.9
United Kingdom
1946–1975
270–47
2.1
2.6
- 1.5
5.5
Columns 2 and 3: Percent of GDP. Columns 4 to 6: Percent.
Source: S. M. A. Abbas et al., “Historical Patterns and Dynamics of Public Debt: Evidence from a New Database,” IMF Economic Review, 
2011 (November): pp. 717–742.
Table 1 
Changes in Debt Ratios Following World War II


=== PAGE 250 ===
470 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
22-3 RICARDIAN EQUIVALENCE, CYCLICAL 
ADJUSTED DEFICITS, AND WAR FINANCE
Having looked at the mechanics of the government budget constraint, we take up three 
issues in which this constraint plays a central role.
Ricardian Equivalence
How does taking into account the government budget constraint affect the way we 
should think of the effects of deficits on output?
One extreme view is that once the government budget constraint is taken into 
account, neither deficits nor debt have an effect on economic activity! This argument 
is known as the Ricardian equivalence proposition. David Ricardo, a 19th-century 
English economist, was the first to articulate its logic. His argument was further devel-
oped and given prominence in the 1970s by Robert Barro, then at Chicago, now at 
Harvard University. For this reason, the argument is also known as the Ricardo-Barro 
proposition.
The best way to understand the logic of the proposition is to use the example of tax 
changes from Section 22-2:
 
■
Suppose that the government decreases taxes by 1 (again, think 1 billion dollars) this 
year and announces that, to repay the debt, it will increase taxes by 11 + r2 next 
year. What will be the effect of the initial tax cut on consumption?
 
■
One possible answer is: No effect at all. Why? Because consumers realize that the tax 
cut is not much of a gift. Lower taxes this year are exactly offset, in present value, by 
higher taxes next year. Put another way, their human wealth —the present value of 
after-tax labor income—is unaffected. Current taxes go down by 1, but the present 
value of next year’s taxes goes up by 11 + r2>11 + r2 = 1, and the net effect of the 
two changes is exactly equal to zero.
 
■
Another way of coming to the same answer—this time looking at saving rather 
than consumption—is as follows: To say that consumers do not change their con-
sumption in response to the tax cut is the same as saying that private saving increases 
one-for-one with the deficit. The Ricardian equivalence proposition says that if 
a government finances a given path of spending through deficits, private saving 
will increase one-for-one with the decrease in public saving, leaving total saving 
unchanged. The total amount left for investment will not be affected. Over time, the 
mechanics of the government budget constraint imply that government debt will 
increase. But this increase will not come at the expense of capital accumulation.
Under the Ricardian equivalence proposition, a long sequence of deficits and the 
associated increase in government debt are no cause for worry. As the government is dis-
saving, the argument goes, people are saving more in anticipation of the higher taxes to 
come. The decrease in public saving is offset by an equal increase in private saving. Total 
saving is therefore unaffected, and so is investment. The economy has the same capital 
stock today that it would have had if there had been no increase in debt. Therefore, high 
debt is no cause for concern.
How seriously should we take the Ricardian equivalence proposition? Most econo-
mists would answer: “Seriously, but surely not seriously enough to think that deficits 
and debt are irrelevant.” A major theme of this book has been that expectations mat-
ter, that consumption decisions depend not only on current income but also on future 
income. If it were widely believed that a tax cut this year will be followed by an offset-
ting increase in taxes next year, the effect on consumption would indeed probably be 
Although Ricardo stated the 
logic of the argument, he also 
argued that there were many 
reasons why it would not 
hold in practice. In contrast, 
Barro argued that the argu-
ment was not only logically 
correct but also a good 
description of reality.
c
See Chapter 15 for a defini-
tion of human wealth and 
a discussion of its role in 
consumption.
c
Go back to the IS-LM model. 
If Ricardian equivalence 
holds, what is the multiplier 
associated with a decrease in 
current taxes?
c


=== PAGE 251 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
471
small. Many consumers would save most or all of the tax cut in anticipation of higher 
taxes next year. (Replace year by month or week and the argument becomes even more 
convincing.)
Of course, tax cuts rarely come with the announcement of corresponding tax 
increases a year later. Consumers must guess when and how taxes will eventually be 
increased. This fact does not by itself invalidate the Ricardian equivalence argument. No 
matter when taxes will be increased, the government budget constraint still implies that 
the present value of future tax increases must always be equal to the decrease in taxes 
today.
Take the second example we looked at in Section 22-2, drawn in 
Figure 22-1(b) in which the government waits t years to increase taxes and so increases 
taxes by 11 + r2t - 1. The present value in year 0 of this expected tax increase is 
11 + r2t - 1>11 + r2t - 1 = 1—exactly equal to the original tax cut. The change in 
human wealth from the tax cut is still zero.
But insofar as future tax increases appear more distant and their timing more uncer-
tain, consumers are in fact more likely to ignore them. This may be because they expect 
to die before taxes go up or, more likely, because they just do not think that far into the 
future. In either case, Ricardian equivalence is likely to fail.
So it is safe to conclude that budget deficits have an important effect on activity, 
although perhaps a smaller effect than you thought before going through the Ricardian 
equivalence argument. In the short run, larger deficits are likely to lead to higher demand 
and higher output. In the long run, higher government debt lowers capital accumulation 
and, as a result, lowers output.
Deficits, Output Stabilization, and the Cyclically Adjusted 
Deficit
The fact that budget deficits do, indeed, have long-run adverse effects on capital accu-
mulation, and in turn adverse effects on output, does not imply that fiscal policy should 
not be used to reduce output fluctuations. Rather, it implies that deficits during reces-
sions should be offset by surpluses during booms, so as not to lead to a steady increase 
in debt.
To help assess whether fiscal policy is on track, economists have constructed deficit 
measures that tell them what the deficit would be, under existing tax and spending rules, 
if output were equal to potential output. Such measures come under many names—
the full-employment deficit, the midcycle deficit, the standardized employment 
deficit, and the structural deficit (the term used by the OECD). I shall use cyclically 
adjusted deficit, the term I find the most intuitive.
Such a measure gives a simple benchmark against which to judge the direction of 
fiscal policy. If the actual deficit is large but the cyclically adjusted deficit is zero, then cur-
rent fiscal policy is consistent with no systematic increase in debt over time. The debt will 
increase as long as output is below the potential level of output; but as output returns to 
potential, the deficit will disappear and the debt will stabilize.
It does not follow that the goal of fiscal policy should be to maintain a cyclically 
adjusted deficit equal to zero at all times. In a recession, the government may want to 
run a deficit large enough that even the cyclically adjusted deficit is positive. In this case, 
the fact that the cyclically adjusted deficit is positive provides a useful warning: that the 
return of output to potential will not be enough to stabilize the debt. The government will 
have to take specific measures, from tax increases to cuts in spending, to decrease the 
deficit at some point in the future.
The theory underlying the concept of the cyclically adjusted deficit is simple. The 
practice of it has proven tricky. To see why, we need to look at how measures of the 
Recall that this assumes 
that government spending is 
unchanged. If people expect 
government spending to be 
decreased in the future, what 
will they do?
b
The increase in taxes in t 
years is 11 + r2t - 1. The 
discount factor for a dol-
lar t years from now is 
1>11 + r2t - 1. So the value 
of the increase in taxes t 
years from now as of today is 
11 + r2t - 1>11 + r2t - 1 = 1.
b
Note the analogy with mon-
etary policy: The fact that 
higher money growth leads in 
the long run to more inflation 
does not imply that monetary 
policy should not be used for 
output stabilization.
b


=== PAGE 252 ===
472 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
cyclically adjusted deficit are constructed. Construction requires two steps: First, estab-
lish how much lower the deficit would be if output were, say, 1% higher. Second, assess 
how far output is from potential.
 
■
The first step is relatively straightforward. For the United States, a reliable rule of 
thumb is that a 1% decrease in output leads automatically to an increase in the defi-
cit of about 0.5% of GDP. This increase occurs because most taxes are proportional 
to output, whereas most government spending does not depend on the level of out-
put. That means a decrease in output, which leads to a decrease in revenues and not 
much change in spending, naturally leads to a larger deficit.
If output is, say, 5% below potential, the deficit as a ratio to GDP will be about 
2.5% larger than if output were at potential. (This effect of activity on the deficit has 
been called an automatic stabilizer. A recession naturally generates a deficit, and 
therefore a fiscal expansion, which partly counteracts the recession.)
 
■
The second step is more difficult. Recall from Chapter 7 that potential output is the 
output level that would be produced if the economy were operating at the natural 
rate of unemployment. Too low an estimate of the natural rate of unemployment 
will lead to too high an estimate of potential output and therefore too optimistic a 
measure of the cyclically adjusted deficit.
This difficulty explains in part what happened to debt in Europe in the 1980s. 
Based on the assumption of an unchanged natural unemployment rate, the cyclically 
adjusted deficits of the 1980s did not look that bad. If European unemployment had 
returned to its level of the 1970s, the associated increase in output would have been 
enough to reestablish budget balance in most countries. But it turned out that much 
of the increase in unemployment reflected an increase in the natural unemployment 
rate, and unemployment remained high during the 1980s. As a result, the decade 
was characterized by high deficits and large increases in debt ratios in most European 
countries.
Wars and Deficits
Wars typically bring about large budget deficits. As we saw in Chapter 21, the two largest 
increases in US government debt in the 20th century took place during World War I and 
World War II. We examine the case of World War II further in the Focus Box “Deficits, 
Consumption, and Investment in the United States during World War II.”
Is it right for governments to rely so much on deficits to finance wars? After all, war 
economies are usually operating at low unemployment, so output stabilization reasons 
for running deficits are irrelevant. The answer, nevertheless, is yes. In fact, there are two 
good reasons to run deficits during wars:
 
■
The first is distributional: Deficit finance is a way to pass some of the burden of the 
war to those alive after the war. It seems only fair for future generations to share in 
the sacrifices the war requires.
 
■
The second is more narrowly economic: Deficit spending helps reduce tax distortions. 
Let’s look at each reason in turn.
Passing on The Burden of the War
Wars lead to large increases in government spending. Consider the implications of 
financing this increased spending through either increased taxes or debt finance. To dis-
tinguish this case from our previous discussion of output stabilization, let’s also assume 
that output is and remains at its potential level.
Look at the two peaks asso-
ciated with World War I and 
World War II in Figure 21–4.
c


=== PAGE 253 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
473
■ 
Suppose that the government relies on deficit finance. With government spending 
sharply up, there will be a large increase in the demand for goods. Given our assump-
tion that output stays the same, the interest rate will have to increase enough to main-
tain equilibrium. Investment, which depends on the interest rate, will decrease sharply. 
(More realistically, in a war economy, the government may use direct measures to 
decrease non–war-related investment, without resorting to a high interest rate.)
■ 
Suppose instead that the government finances the spending increase through an 
increase in taxes—say, income taxes. Consumption will decline sharply. Exactly how 
much depends on consumers’ expectations: The longer they expect the war to last, the 
longer they will expect higher taxes to last, and the more they will decrease their con-
sumption. In any case, the increase in government spending will be partly offset by 
a decrease in consumption. Interest rates will increase by less than they would have 
increased under deficit spending, and investment will therefore decrease by less.
In short, for a given output, the increase in government spending requires either a 
decrease in consumption or a decrease in investment. Whether the government relies on 
tax increases or deficits determines whether consumption or investment does more of the 
adjustment when government spending increases.
How does this affect who bears the burden of the war? The more the government 
relies on deficits, the smaller the decrease in consumption during the war and the larger 
the decrease in investment. Lower investment means a lower capital stock after the war 
and therefore lower output after the war. By reducing capital accumulation, deficits 
become a way of passing some of the burden of the war onto future generations.
Reducing Tax Distortions
There is another argument for running deficits, not only during wars but also, more gen-
erally, in times when government spending is exceptionally high. Think, for example, of 
reconstruction after an earthquake or the costs involved in the reunification of Germany 
in the early 1990s.
Assume that the econ-
omy is closed, so that 
Y = C + I + G. Suppose 
that G goes up, and Y 
remains the same. Then 
C + I must decrease. If taxes 
are not increased, most 
of the decrease will come 
from a decrease in I. If taxes 
are increased, most of the 
decrease will come from a 
decrease in C.
b
Deficits, Consumption, and Investment in the United 
States during World War II
In 1939, the share of US government spending on goods 
and services in GDP was 15%. By 1944, it had increased to 
45%! The increase was due to increased spending on national 
defense, which went from 1% of GDP in 1939 to 36% in 1944.
Faced with such a massive increase in spending, the US 
government reacted with large tax increases. For the first 
time in US history, the individual income tax became a major 
source of revenues: individual income tax revenues, which 
were 1% of GDP in 1939, increased to 8.5% in 1944. But 
the tax increases were still far less than the increase in gov-
ernment expenditures. The increase in federal revenues, from 
7.2% of GDP in 1939 to 22.7% in 1944, was only a little 
more than half the increase in expenditures.
The result was a sequence of large budget deficits. By 1944, 
the federal deficit reached 22% of GDP. The ratio of debt to GDP, 
already high at 53% in 1939 because of the deficits the govern-
ment had run during the Great Depression, reached 110%!
Was the increase in government spending achieved at the 
expense of consumption or private investment? (As we saw in 
Chapter 18, it could in principle have come from higher imports 
and a current account deficit. But the United States had nobody 
to borrow from during the war. Rather, it was lending to some 
of its allies. Loans and gifts from the US government to foreign 
countries were equal to 6% of US GDP in 1944.)
 
■
It was met in large part by a decrease in consumption. 
The share of  consumption in GDP fell by 23 percent-
age points, from 74% to 51%. Part of  the decrease 
in consumption may have been due to anticipations 
of  higher taxes after the war; part of  it was due 
to the unavailability of  many consumer durables. 
Patriotism also probably motivated people to save 
more and buy the war bonds issued by the govern-
ment to finance the war.
 
■
It was also met by a 6% decrease in the share of (private) 
investment in GDP—from 10% to 4%. Part of the bur-
den of the war was therefore passed on, in the form of 
lower capital accumulation, to those living after the war.
FOCUS


=== PAGE 254 ===
474 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
The argument is as follows: If the government were to increase taxes to finance the tem-
porary increase in spending, tax rates would have to be very high. Very high tax rates can 
lead to very high economic distortions. Faced with very high tax rates, people work less or 
engage in illegal, untaxed activities. Rather than moving the tax rate up and down to always 
balance the budget, it is better (from the point of view of reducing distortions) to maintain a 
relatively constant tax rate—to smooth taxes. Tax smoothing implies running large deficits 
when government spending is exceptionally high and small surpluses the rest of the time.
22-4 THE DANGERS OF HIGH DEBT
We have seen that high debt requires higher taxes in the future. A lesson from history 
is that high debt can also lead to vicious cycles, making the conduct of fiscal policy 
extremely difficult. Let’s look at this more closely.
High Debt, Default Risk, and Vicious Cycles
Return to equation (22.5):
Bt
Yt
- Bt - 1
Yt - 1
= 1r - g2Bt - 1
Yt - 1
+ 1Gt - Tt2
Yt
Take a country with a high debt ratio, say, 100%. Suppose the real interest rate is 3% 
and the growth rate is 2%. The first term on the right is 13% - 2%2 times 100% = 1% 
of GDP. Suppose further that the government is running a primary surplus of 1% of out-
put, so just enough to keep the debt ratio constant (the right side of the equation equals 
13% - 2%2 * 100% + 1-1%2 = 0%).
Now suppose financial investors start to worry that the government may not 
be able to fully repay the debt. They ask for a higher interest rate to compensate for 
what they perceive as a higher risk of default on the debt. This makes it more difficult 
for the government to stabilize the debt. Suppose, for example, that the interest rate 
increases from 3% to 8%. Then, just to stabilize the debt, the government needs to 
run a primary surplus of 6% of output (the right side of the equation is then equal to 
18% - 2%2 * 100% + 1-6%2 = 0).
Suppose that, in response to the increase in the interest rate, the government takes 
measures to increase the primary surplus to 6% of output. The spending cuts or tax 
increases that are needed are likely to prove politically costly, potentially generating more 
political uncertainty, a higher risk of default, and thus a further increase in the inter-
est rate. Also, the sharp fiscal contraction is likely to lead to a recession, decreasing the 
growth rate. Both the increase in the real interest rate and the decrease in growth further 
increase 1r - g2, requiring an even larger budget surplus to stabilize the debt. At some 
point, the government may become unable to increase the primary surplus sufficiently, 
and the debt ratio starts increasing, leading investors to become even more worried and 
to require an even higher interest rate. Increases in the interest rate and increases in 
the debt ratio feed on each other. In short, the higher the ratio of debt to GDP, the larger 
the potential for catastrophic debt dynamics. Even if the fear that the government may 
not fully repay the debt was initially unfounded, it can easily become self-fulfilling. The 
higher interest that the government must pay on its debt can lead the government to lose 
control of its budget and lead to an increase in debt to a level such that the government is 
unable to repay the debt, thus validating the initial fears.
This should remind you of 
bank runs and the discus-
sion in Chapter 6. If people 
believe a bank is not solvent 
and decide to withdraw their 
funds, the bank may have 
to sell its assets at fire sale 
prices and become insolvent, 
validating the initial fears. 
Here, investors do not ask 
for their funds, but require a 
higher interest rate. The result 
is the same. c


=== PAGE 255 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
475
This is far from an abstract issue. Let’s look again at what happened in the euro 
area during the crisis. Figure 22-2 shows the evolution of interest rates on Italian and 
Spanish government bonds from March to December 2012. For each country, it plots 
the difference, also called the spread, between the two-year interest rate on the coun-
try’s government bonds and the two-year interest rate on German government bonds. 
The reason for comparing interest rates to German interest rates is that German bonds 
are considered nearly riskless. The spreads are measured, on the vertical axis, in basis 
points (a basis point is a hundredth of a percent).
Both spreads started rising in March 2012. Toward the end of July, the spread on 
Italian bonds reached 500 basis points (equivalently, 5%), and the spread on Spanish 
bonds, 660 basis points (6.6%). These spreads reflected two worries: first, that the Italian 
and Spanish governments might default on their debt, and second, that they might 
devalue. In principle, in a monetary union, such as the euro area, no one should expect a 
devaluation unless markets start thinking that the monetary union might break up and 
that countries might reintroduce national currencies at a devalued exchange rate. This is 
exactly what investors worried about in the spring and summer of 2012. We can under-
stand why by going back to our discussion of self-fulfilling debt crises.
Consider Italy, for instance. In March, the interest on Italian two-year bonds was 
below 3%; this was the sum of the interest on German two-year bonds, slightly below 
1%, plus a 2% risk spread due to investors’ concerns about the Italian government’s 
creditworthiness. The country had at the time (and still has) a debt-to-GDP ratio 
above 130%. With interest below 3% such a high debt burden was sustainable; Italy 
was generating primary budget surpluses sufficient to keep the debt stable, although 
at that high level. Italy was fragile (because the debt was so high) but in a “good equi-
librium.” At this point investors started asking themselves what would happen if, for 
some reason, interest rates on Italian bonds were to double, to 6%. They concluded 
that if that happened, it was unlikely that Italy would be able to raise its primary sur-
plus high enough to keep the debt stable. It was more likely that the country would 
enter a debt spiral and end up defaulting. At that point Italy might decide to aban-
don the monetary union and rely on a devaluation to improve its competitiveness and 
Go back to Section 20-2 for 
a discussion of how, under 
fixed exchange rates, the 
expectation of a devaluation 
leads to high interest rates. 
The same is true for a coun-
try in a common currency 
area.
b
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Mar-12
Jun-12
Sep-12
Time
Dec-12
Italy
Yield spread over German bonds (basis points)
Spain
Figure 22-2
The Increase in European 
Bond Spreads
The spreads on Italian and 
Spanish two-year govern-
ment bonds over German 
two-year bonds increased 
sharply between March and 
July 2012. At the end of July, 
when the European Central 
Bank stated that it would 
do whatever was necessary 
to prevent a breakup of the 
euro, the spreads decreased.
Source: Haver Analytics.


=== PAGE 256 ===
476 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
support growth because defaults are usually accompanied by sharp recessions. The 
fear that this might happen shifted Italy from a “good” to a “bad” equilibrium. As 
investors recognized that a default and an exit from the euro were a possibility, inter-
est rates jumped to 6%, and this increase in interest rates validated the initial fears. 
Eventually, it was the European Central Bank (ECB) that shifted Italy back to the good 
equilibrium. On July 26, 2012, the president of the bank, Mario Draghi, clearly said 
that a breakup of the euro was out of question and that the ECB would do whatever 
was necessary to avoid it. Investors believed the promise and Italy shifted back to the 
good equilibrium.
Thus, Italy and Spain succeeded, with the help of the ECB, in avoiding bad debt 
dynamics and default. What if a government does not succeed in stabilizing the debt and 
enters a debt spiral? Then, historically, one of two things happens: The government either 
explicitly defaults on its debt or relies increasingly on money finance. Let’s look at each 
outcome.
Debt Default
At some point, when a government finds itself unable to repay the outstanding debt, 
it may decide to default. Default is often partial, however, and creditors take what is 
known as a haircut. A haircut of 30%, for example, means that creditors receive only 
70% of what they were owed. Default also comes under many names, many of them 
euphemisms—probably to make the prospects more appealing (or less unappealing) to 
creditors. It is called debt restructuring, or debt rescheduling (when interest pay-
ments are deferred rather than cancelled), or, quite ironically, private sector involve-
ment (the private sector, that is, the creditors, are asked to get involved, i.e., to accept a 
haircut). It may be unilaterally imposed by the government, or it may be the result of a 
negotiation with creditors, who, knowing that they will not be fully repaid in any case, 
may prefer to work out a deal with the government. This is what happened to Greece in 
2012 when private creditors accepted a haircut of roughly 50%.
When debt is very high, default would seem to be an appealing solution. Having a 
lower level of debt after default reduces the size of the required fiscal consolidation and thus 
makes it more credible. It lowers required taxes, potentially allowing for higher growth. But 
default comes with high costs. If debt is held, for example, by domestic pension funds, as 
is often the case, retirees may suffer very much from the default. If it is held by domestic 
banks, then some banks may go bankrupt, with major adverse effects on the economy. If 
debt is held instead mostly by foreigners, then the country’s international reputation may 
be lost and it may be difficult for the government to borrow from abroad for a long time. So, 
in general, and rightly so, governments are very reluctant to default on their debt.
Money Finance
The other outcome is money finance. So far we have assumed that the only way a gov-
ernment could finance itself was by selling bonds. There is however another possibility. 
The government can finance itself by, in effect, printing money. The way it does this is 
not actually by printing money itself but by issuing bonds and then requiring the central 
bank to buy its bonds in exchange for money. This process is called money finance or 
debt monetization. Because, in this case, the rate of money creation is determined by 
the government deficit rather than by decisions of the central bank, this is also known as 
fiscal dominance of monetary policy.
How large a deficit can a government finance through such money creation? Let H 
be the amount of central bank money in the economy. (I shall refer to central bank money 
simply as money for short in what follows.) Let ∆H be money creation; that is, the change 
in the nominal money stock from one month to the next. The revenue, in real terms (that 
By this statement, Mario 
Draghi meant that the ECB 
would be ready to buy 
Spanish or Italian bonds 
to maintain a low yield and 
go back to the “good equi-
librium.” In this event, the 
commitment was enough to 
decrease rates and the ECB 
did not have to intervene 
at all.
c
The danger is not completely 
gone. At the time of writing, 
the spread on Italian bonds 
remains high, around 2.5%, 
due partly to still-high debt 
and deficits, which slightly 
exceed EU rules, and wor-
ries that the government, 
despite its statements to the 
contrary, may consider a 
euro exit.
c
For a refresher on how the 
central bank creates money, 
go back to Chapter 4, 
Section 4-3.
c


=== PAGE 257 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
477
is, in terms of goods), that the government generates by creating an amount of money 
equal to ∆H is therefore ∆H>P—money creation during the period divided by the price 
level. This revenue from money creation is called seignorage.
seignorage = ∆H
P
Seignorage is equal to money creation divided by the price level. To see what rate of 
(central bank) nominal money growth is required to generate a given amount of seignor-
age, rewrite ∆H>P as
∆H
P
= ∆H
H  H
P
In words: We can think of seignorage 1∆H>P2 as the product of the rate of nominal 
money growth 1∆H>H2 and the real money stock 1H>P2. Replacing this expression in 
the previous equation gives
seignorage = ∆H
H  H
P
This gives us a relation between seignorage, the rate of nominal money growth, and 
real money balances. To think about relevant magnitudes, it is convenient to take one 
more step and divide both sides of the equation by, say, monthly GDP, Y, to get
 
seignorage
Y
= ∆H
H a
H>P
Y b 
(22.6)
Suppose the government is running a budget deficit equal to 10% of GDP and decides 
to finance it through seignorage, so 1deficit>Y2 = 1seignorage>Y2 = 10%. The average 
ratio of central bank money to monthly GDP in advanced countries is roughly equal to 1, 
so choose 1H>P2>Y = 1. This implies that nominal money growth must satisfy
10% = ∆H
H  times 1 1 ∆H
H
= 10%
Thus, to finance a deficit of 10% of GDP through seignorage, given a ratio of central 
bank money to monthly GDP of 1, the monthly growth rate of nominal money must be 
equal to 10%.
This is surely a high rate of money growth, but one might conclude that, in 
exceptional circumstances, it may be an acceptable price to pay to finance the deficit. 
Unfortunately, this conclusion would be wrong. As money growth increases, inflation 
typically follows. And high inflation leads people to want to reduce their demand for 
money, and in turn the demand for central bank money. In other words, as the rate of 
money growth increases, the real money balances that people want to hold decreases. 
If, for example, they were willing to hold money balances equal to one month of income 
when inflation was low, they may decide to reduce it to one week of income or less when 
inflation reaches 10%. In terms of equation (22.6), as 1∆H>H2 increases, 1H>P2>Y 
decreases. And so, to achieve the same level of revenues, the government needs to 
increase the rate of money growth further. But higher money growth leads to further 
inflation, a further decrease in 1H>P2>Y, and the need for further money growth.
Soon, high inflation turns into hyperinflation, the term that economists use for 
very high inflation—typically inflation in excess of 30% per month. The Focus Box 
“Money Financing and Hyperinflations” describes some of the most famous episodes. 
The word seignorage is 
revealing. The right to issue 
money was a precious 
source of revenue for the sei-
gneurs, or lords, of the past. 
They could buy the goods 
they wanted by issuing their 
own money and using it to 
pay for the goods.
c
This is an example of a 
general proposition. As you 
increase the tax rate (here the 
rate of inflation), the tax base 
(here real money balances) 
decreases.
b


=== PAGE 258 ===
478 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
Money Financing and Hyperinflations
We saw in this chapter that the attempt to finance a large 
 fiscal deficit through money creation can lead to high inflation, 
or even hyperinflation. This scenario has played out many 
times in the past. (At the time of writing, it is playing out in 
Venezuela, where annual inflation hit 80,000% in 2018!) You 
probably have heard of the hyperinflation that took place in 
post–World War I Germany. In 1913, the value of all currency 
circulating in Germany was 6 billion marks. Ten years later, 
in October 1923, 6 billion marks was barely enough to buy a 
one-kilo loaf of rye bread in Berlin. A month later, the price of 
the same loaf of bread had increased to 428 billion marks. But 
the German hyperinflation is not the only example.
Table 1 summarizes the seven major hyperinflations that 
followed World War I and World War II. They share a num-
ber of features. They were all short (lasting a year or so) but 
intense, with money growth and inflation running at 50% 
per month or more. The increases in the price levels were stag-
gering. As you can see, the largest price increase occurred not 
in Germany but in Hungary after World War II: What cost 1 
Hungarian pengő in August 1945 cost 3,800 trillions of tril-
lions of pengős less than a year later! And Hungary has the 
distinction of having not one but two hyperinflations, one 
after World War I and the other after World War II.
Inflation rates of this magnitude have not been seen 
since the 1940s. But many countries have experienced high 
inflation as a result of money finance. Monthly inflation 
ran above 20% in many Latin American countries in the 
late 1980s. A recent example of high inflation is Zimbabwe, 
where, in 2008, monthly inflation reached 500% before a 
stabilization program was adopted in early 2009. At the 
time of writing, monthly inflation has reached 300% in 
Venezuela. The photo shows a creative and more valuable 
use of bolívares, the Venezuelan money.
It will come as no surprise that hyperinflations have enor-
mous economic costs:
 
■
The transaction system works less and less well. One 
famous example of inefficient exchange occurred in 
Germany at the end of its hyperinflation in 1923. 
People had to use wheelbarrows to cart around the huge 
amounts of currency needed for daily transactions.
 
■
Price signals become less and less useful. Because prices 
change so often, it is difficult for consumers and produc-
ers to assess the relative prices of goods and to make 
informed decisions. The evidence shows that the higher 
the rate of inflation, the higher the variation in the rela-
tive prices of different goods. Thus, the price system, 
which is crucial to the functioning of a market econ-
omy, also becomes less and less efficient. A joke heard in 
Israel during the high inflation of the 1980s: “Why is it 
cheaper to take the taxi rather than the bus? Because in 
the bus, you have to pay the fare at the beginning of the 
ride. In the taxi, you pay only at the end.”
 
■
Swings in the inflation rate become larger. It becomes 
harder to predict what inflation will be in the near future, 
whether it will be, say, 500% or 1,000% over the next year. 
Borrowing at a given nominal interest rate becomes more 
and more of a gamble. If we borrow at, say, 1,000% for a 
year, we may end up paying a real interest rate of 500% 
or 0%: a large difference! The result is that borrowing 
and lending typically come to a stop in the final months 
of hyperinflation, leading to a large decline in investment.
FOCUS
Country
Start
End
PT>P0
Average Monthly 
Inflation Rate (%)
Average Monthly 
Money Growth (%)
Austria
Oct. 1921
Aug. 1922
70
47
31
Germany
Aug. 1922
Nov. 1923
1.0 * 1010
322
314
Greece
Nov. 1943
Nov. 1944
4.7 * 106
365
220
Hungary 1
Mar. 1923
Feb. 1924
44
46
33
Hungary 2
Aug. 1945
Jul. 1946
3.8 * 1027
19,800
12,200
Poland
Jan. 1923
Jan. 1924
699
82
72
Russia
Dec. 1921
Jan. 1924
1.2 * 105
57
49
PT>P0
 : Price level in the last month of hyperinflation divided by the price level in the first month.
Source: Philip Cagan, “The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation,” in Milton Friedman ed., Studies in the Quantity 
Theory of Money (University of Chicago Press, 1956), Table 1.
Table 1 
Seven Hyperinflations of the 1920s and 1940s


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 258 ===
478

Money Financing and Hyperinflations

We saw in this chapter that the attempt to finance a large
fiscal deficit through money creation can lead to high inflation,

or even hyperinflation. This scenario has played out many

times in the past. (At the time of writing, it is playing out in
Venezuela, where annual inflation hit 80,000% in 2018!) You
probably have heard of the hyperinflation that took place in
post-World War I Germany. In 1913, the value of all currency

circulating in Germany was 6 billion marks. Ten years later,
in October 1923, 6 billion marks was barely enough to buy a
one-kilo loaf of rye bread in Berlin. A month later, the price of
the same loaf of bread had increased to 428 billion marks. But
the German hyperinflation is not the only example.

Table 1 summarizes the seven major hyperinflations that
followed World War I and World War II. They share a num-

ber of features. They were all short (lasting a year or so) but il

intense, with money growth and inflation running at 50%
per month or more. The increases in the price levels were stag-
gering. As you can see, the largest price increase occurred not
in Germany but in Hungary after World War II: What cost 1
Hungarian pengé in August 1945 cost 3,800 trillions of tril-

lions of pengés less than a year later! And Hungary has the
distinction of having not one but two hyperinflations, one
after World War | and the other after World War II.

Inflation rates of this magnitude have not been seen

since the 1940s. But many countries have experienced high
inflation as a result of money finance. Monthly inflation
ran above 20% in many Latin American countries in the
late 1980s. A recent example of high inflation is Zimbabwe,
where, in 2008, monthly inflation reached 500% before a
stabilization program was adopted in early 2009. At the
time of writing, monthly inflation has reached 300% in
Venezuela. The photo shows a creative and more valuable
use of bolivares, the Venezuelan money.

It will come as no surprise that hyperinflations have enor-
mous economic costs:

The transaction system works less and less well. One
famous example of inefficient exchange occurred in
Germany at the end of its hyperinflation in 1923.

People had to use wheelbarrows to cart around the huge
amounts of currency needed for daily transactions.
Price signals become less and less useful. Because prices
change so ofien, it is difficult for consumers and produc-
ers to assess the relative prices of goods and to make
informed decisions. The evidence shows that the higher
the rate of inflation, the higher the variation in the rela-
tive prices of different goods. Thus, the price system,
which is crucial to the functioning of a market econ-
omy, also becomes less and less efficient. A joke heard in
Israel during the high inflation of the 1980s: “Why is it
cheaper to take the taxi rather than the bus? Because in
the bus, you have to pay the fare at the beginning of the
ride. In the taxi, you pay only at the end.”

‘Swings in the inflation rate become larger. It becomes
harder to predict what inflation will be in the near future,
whether it will be, say, 500% or 1,000% over the next year.
Borrowing at a given nominal interest rate becomes more
and more of a gamble. If we borrow at, say, 1,000% fora
year, we may end up paying a real interest rate of 500%
or 0%: a large difference! The result is that borrowing
and lending typically come to a stop in the final months
of hyperinflation, leading to a large decline in investment.

Table 1 Seven Hyperinflations of the 1920s and 1940s

Average Monthly | Average Monthly
Country Start End P;/Po Inflation Rate (%) | Money Growth (%)
Austria Oct. 1921 | Aug. 1922 70 47 31
Germany | Aug. 1922 | Nov. 1923 | 4.9 x 101° 322 314
Greece Nov. 1943 | Nov. 1944 | 4.7 x 108 365 220
Hungary 1 | Mar. 1923 | Feb. 1924 44 46 33
Hungary 2 | Aug. 1945 | Jul. 1946 | 3.8 x 1027 19,800 12,200
Poland Jan. 1923 | Jan. 1924 699 82 72
Russia Dec. 1921 | Jan. 1924 | 4.2 x 405 57 49
P,/Py: Price level in the last month of hyperinflation divided by the price level in the first month.
Source: Philip Cagan, “The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation,” in Milton Friedman ed., Studies in the Quantity
Theory of Money (University of Chicago Press, 1956), Table 1

Back to Policy Extensions


=== PAGE 259 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
479
Hyperinflation ends only when fiscal policy is dramatically improved and the need to 
finance the deficit through money creation is eliminated. By then, the damage has been 
done.
As inflation becomes very high, there is typically an increasing consensus that it should 
be stopped. Eventually, the government reduces the deficit and no longer has recourse to 
money finance. Inflation stops, but not before the economy has suffered substantial costs.
22-5 THE CHALLENGES FACING US 
FISCAL POLICY TODAY
How bad is the debt situation in the United States today? In 2018, the debt issued by the 
federal government—the number that is typically quoted in newspapers, called gross 
debt—stood at $21,300 billion, or 104% of GDP. Part of that debt was held, however, by 
some government entities—for example, by the social security trust fund. The more rel-
evant number, namely debt held by the public, called net debt, stood at $5,750  billion, 
or 77% of GDP, a substantially lower ratio than the gross debt ratio, although still a his-
torically high number.
The federal deficit stood at $780 billion, or 3.8% of GDP. The ratio of interest pay-
ments to GDP was 1.6%, so the primary deficit (that is, the deficit net of interest  payments) 
was equal to 3.8% - 1.6% = 2.2%; again, not a very high number, but still historically 
high in the absence of a war or a recession.
To see what this implied for debt dynamics, let’s return to equation (22.5). Recall 
that the change in the debt ratio is equal to the sum of two terms: first, the difference 
between the interest rate and the growth rate, times the debt-to-GDP ratio; second, the 
ratio of the primary deficit to GDP:
Bt
Yt
- Bt - 1
Yt - 1
= 1r - g2Bt - 1
Yt - 1
+ 1Gt - Tt2
Yt
In 2018, the real interest rate on government debt was 0.5%—the difference 
between the nominal interest rate, 2.5%, and inflation, 2%. The growth rate was 
equal to 2.9%. The debt-to-GDP ratio was 77%, so the first term above was equal to 
10.5% - 2.9%2 * 77% = -1.8%. Absent a primary deficit, the debt-to-GDP ratio would 
have declined by −1.8%. The primary deficit was positive, however, equal to 2.2%. Putting the 
two together, this implies that the debt ratio increased slightly, by -1.8% + 2.2% = 0.4% 
of GDP.
An increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio of 0.4% of GDP is small and suggests little rea-
son for concern. The future, however, may see larger increases in debt: At 2.9%, growth 
was unusually high in 2018 and is forecast to be closer to 2%. And looking forward, two 
major government spending items look set to substantially increase:
 
■
Social security payments are projected to increase from 4.9% of GDP in 2018 to 
6.0% in 2029, reflecting the aging of America—the rapid increase in the proportion 
of people older than age 65 that will take place as the Baby Boom generation reaches 
retirement age.
 
■
Medicare (the program that provides health care to retirees) and Medicaid (the program 
that provides health care to poor people) are projected to increase from 5.4% of GDP in 
2018 to 7.2% in 2029. This large increase reflects the increasing cost of health care in 
the case of Medicaid and the increasing number of retirees in the case of Medicare.
Given these expected increases in spending, and for the reasons we discussed earlier 
in the chapter, it may be desirable to increase taxes and decrease the debt-to-GDP ratio 


=== PAGE 260 ===
480 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
now so as to have current taxpayers assume more of the burden of the increased future 
spending, as well as to avoid large, potentially distortionary, increases in taxes later on. 
This suggests starting to decrease the debt-to-GDP ratio now by reducing primary deficits 
or even generating primary surpluses, rather than letting debt increase further.
How much and at what rate should primary deficits be reduced? There are three rel-
evant arguments here.
The first is that the real interest rate the government pays on its debt is currently 
very low, indeed lower than the growth rate. Figure 22-3 shows the evolution of the real 
interest rate, constructed as the nominal one-year T-bill rate minus actual CPI inflation 
since 1960. It shows that, after a sharp increase in the 1980s, the real rate has decreased 
from a peak of nearly 7% in 1984 to −0.3% in 2018. Current forecasts are that the inter-
est rate will remain lower than the growth rate for the foreseeable future.
This has two implications. The first is that, while government debt is high, debt ser-
vice, i.e., the interest paid on the debt, is still low. The second is that, if the interest rate 
remains lower than the growth rate, the government can decrease the ratio of debt to 
GDP over time while still running primary deficits. To see this, go back to equation (22.5) 
and the computation of debt dynamics we went through earlier. In 2018, absent a pri-
mary deficit, the debt-to-GDP ratio would have decreased by 1.8%. Put another way, the 
government could have run a primary deficit of up to 1.8% of GDP, and the debt-to-GDP 
ratio would still have declined. The difference between the growth rate and the interest 
rate is likely to be smaller in the future, but so long as the interest rate remains less than 
the growth rate, this implies that the government can run a (limited) primary deficit and 
still have the debt-to-GDP ratio decrease over time.
The second argument focuses on public investment. One of the ways the government 
deficit was reduced after the large increase during the Great Recession was by cutting 
public investment. In 2018, the ratio of government investment to GDP was the lowest it 
had been since 1950. There is a strong case for increasing it, and the case is strengthened 
by the fact that the cost of borrowing for the government is very low. Thus, there is an 
argument for accepting or even increasing the current primary deficits, if these are used 
to finance public investment instead of current spending or reductions in taxes.
The third argument may be the most important. We saw in Chapter 5 that to avoid a 
decrease in output in response to a reduction in the budget deficit the central bank must 
The average real interest rate 
on government debt was, as 
we saw earlier, a bit higher 
(0.5%) because the maturity 
of the government debt is 
longer than one year and 
long rates were higher than 
the one-year rate.
c
This has been true not only 
in the United States, but in 
most countries. Fiscal con-
solidation often leads to cuts 
in public investment rather 
than in current spending, 
because it is less visible, 
affects current voters less, 
and is thus politically less 
costly.
c
24
22
0
2
4
6
8
1960
1963
1966
1969
1972
1975
1978
1981
1984
1987
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008
2011
2014
2017
Real interest rate on 1-year T-bills
(percent)  
Figure 22-3
The Evolution of the Real 
Interest Rate on One-
Year T-Bills since 1960
After sharply increasing in 
the early 1980s, the real 
interest rate has steadily 
declined.
Source: FRED: TB1YR, 
CPIAUCSL


=== PAGE 261 ===
decrease the interest rate. While, at the time of writing, the US economy is no longer at 
the zero lower bound, the nominal policy rate, at 2.4%, is still low. A large reduction in 
primary deficits would require a large decrease in the policy rate, a decrease that may be 
infeasible given the zero lower bound.
A back-of-the-envelope computation is useful here: Suppose that the multiplier asso-
ciated with a reduction in government spending is equal to 1.5, so a 1% reduction in 
the primary deficit decreases demand by 1.5%. Suppose that a 1% decrease in the policy 
rate increases demand by 1%. Then, to avoid a decrease in output, a reduction in the 
ratio of the primary deficit to GDP by 2% would require a decrease in the policy rate of 
3%, thus a larger decrease than is feasible given the zero lower bound. Put another way, 
given the limits on monetary policy, primary deficits may be needed to maintain output 
at potential.
To summarize: The US debt-to-GDP ratio is high and slowly increasing over time. 
Given the likely increases in spending in the future, it would be desirable to reduce pri-
mary deficits and reduce the debt ratio. Low interest rates, and by implication the low 
cost of debt, imply that it can be done slowly. And because low interest rates, together 
with the zero lower bound, put sharp limits on the use of monetary policy, they also imply 
that it has to be done slowly so as to avoid a decrease in demand and output.
SUMMARY
 
■The government budget constraint gives the evolution of 
government debt as a function of spending and taxes. One 
way of expressing the constraint is that the change in debt 
(the deficit) is equal to the primary deficit plus interest pay-
ments on the debt. The primary deficit is the difference 
between government spending on goods and services, G, 
and taxes net of transfers, T.
 
■The evolution of the ratio of debt to GDP depends on four 
factors: the interest rate, the growth rate, the initial debt 
ratio, and the primary surplus.
 
■Under the Ricardian equivalence proposition, a larger deficit 
is offset by an equal increase in private saving. Deficits have 
no effect on demand or output. The accumulation of debt 
does not affect capital accumulation. In practice, however, 
Ricardian equivalence fails and larger deficits lead to higher 
demand and higher output in the short run. The accumula-
tion of debt leads to lower capital accumulation, and thus to 
lower output in the long run.
 
■To stabilize the economy, the government should run defi-
cits during recessions and surpluses during booms. The 
cyclically adjusted deficit tells us what the deficit would be, 
under existing tax and spending rules, if output were at its 
potential level.
 
■Deficits are justified in times of high spending, such as wars. 
Relative to an increase in taxes, deficits lead to higher con-
sumption and lower investment during wars. They therefore 
shift some of the burden of the war from people living dur-
ing the war to those living after the war. Deficits also help 
smooth taxes and reduce tax distortions.
 
■High debt ratios increase the risk of vicious cycles. A higher 
perceived risk of default can lead to a higher interest rate 
and an increase in debt. The increase in debt can lead to a 
higher perceived risk of default and a higher interest rate. 
Together, both can combine to lead to a debt explosion. 
Governments may have no choice but to default or to rely on 
money finance. Money finance may in turn lead to hyper-
inflation. In either case, the economic costs are likely to be 
high.
 
■The US debt-to-GDP ratio is high and slowly increasing. It 
would be desirable to reduce this ratio over time. The limits 
on the use of monetary policy imply that the reduction will 
have to be gradual and limited.
KEY TERMS
inflation-adjusted deficit, 463
government budget constraint, 463
primary deficit, 465
primary surplus, 465
debt-to-GDP ratio, 468
debt ratio, 468
Ricardian equivalence, 470
Ricardo-Barro proposition, 470
full-employment deficit, 471
mid-cycle deficit, 471
standardized employment deficit, 471
structural deficit, 471
cyclically adjusted deficit, 471
automatic stabilizer, 472
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
481


=== PAGE 262 ===
tax smoothing, 474
spread, 475
basis points, 475
haircut, 476
debt restructuring, 476
debt rescheduling, 476
private sector involvement, 476
money finance, 476
debt monetization, 476
fiscal dominance, 476
seignorage, 477
hyperinflation, 477
gross debt, 479
net debt, 479
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using information in this chapter, label each of the following 
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. The deficit is the difference between real government 
spending and taxes net of transfers.
b. The primary deficit is the difference between government 
spending on goods and services and taxes net of transfers.
c. The United States has experienced wide fluctuations in the 
ratio of debt to GDP in the past century.
d. Tax smoothing and deficit finance help spread the burden 
of war across generations.
e. The government should always take immediate action to 
eliminate a cyclically adjusted budget deficit.
f. If Ricardian equivalence holds, then an increase in income 
taxes will affect neither consumption nor saving.
g. The ratio of debt to GDP cannot exceed 100%.
h. A haircut reduces the value of outstanding government 
debt outstanding.
i. The cyclically adjusted deficit is always smaller than the 
actual deficit.
j. The inflation-adjusted deficit is always smaller than the 
actual deficit.
k. When the ratio of debt to GDP is high, the best policy is a 
fiscal consolidation.
l. A hyperinflation is an inflation rate greater than 30% per 
month.
m. Hyperinflations may distort prices, but they have no effect 
on real output.
2. Consider the following statement:
A deficit during a war can be a good thing. First, the deficit is tem-
porary, so after the war is over, the government can go right back to its 
old level of spending and taxes. Second, given that the evidence supports 
the Ricardian equivalence proposition, the deficit will stimulate the 
economy during wartime, helping to keep the unemployment rate low.
Identify the mistakes in this statement. Is anything in this 
statement correct?
3. Consider an economy characterized by the following facts:
i. The official budget deficit is 4% of GDP.
ii. The debt-to-GDP ratio is 100%.
iii. The nominal interest rate is 10%.
iv. The inflation rate is 7%.
a. What is the primary deficit/surplus ratio to GDP?
b. What is the inflation-adjusted deficit/surplus ratio to 
GDP? There is a “rule-of-thumb” in the chapter to understand 
how the actual deficit changes when output falls below its natu-
ral level.
c. Suppose that output is 2% below its natural level. What is 
the cyclically adjusted, inflation-adjusted deficit/surplus 
ratio to GDP?
d. Suppose instead that output begins at its natural level and 
that output growth remains constant at the normal rate of 
2%. How will the debt-to-GDP ratio change over time?
4. Assume that money demand takes the form
M
P = Y31 - 1r + pe24
where Y = 1,000 and r = 0.1.
a. Assume that, in the short run, pe is constant and equal to 
25%. Calculate the amount of seignorage for each annual 
rate of money growth, ∆M>M, listed.
a. 25%
b. 50%
c. 75%
b. In the medium run, pe = p = ∆M>M. Compute the 
amount of seignorage associated with the three rates of 
annual money growth in part a. Explain why the answers 
differ from those in part a.
DIG DEEPER
5. Consider the economy described in Problem 3 and assume that 
there is a fixed exchange rate, EQ . Suppose that financial investors 
worry that the level of debt is too high and that the government 
may devalue to stimulate output (and therefore tax revenues) to 
help pay down the debt. Financial investors begin to expect a devalu-
ation of 10%. In other words, the expected exchange rate, Ee
t + 1, 
decreases by 10% from its previous value of EQ.
a. Recall the uncovered interest parity condition:
it = i*t - Et + 1
e
- EQ
EQ
 If the foreign interest rate remains constant at 10% a 
year, what must happen to the domestic interest rate 
when Ee
t + 1 decreases by 10%?
b. Suppose that domestic inflation remains the same. What 
happens to the domestic real interest rate? What is likely to 
happen to the growth rate?
c. What happens to the official budget deficit? What happens 
to the inflation-adjusted deficit?
482 
Back to Policy 
Extensions


=== PAGE 263 ===
d. Suppose the growth rate decreases from 2% to 0%. What 
happens to the change in the debt ratio? (Assume that the 
primary deficit/surplus ratio to GDP is unchanged, even 
though the fall in growth may reduce tax revenues.)
6. Ricardian equivalence and fiscal policy
First consider an economy in which Ricardian equivalence 
does not hold.
a. Suppose the government starts with a balanced budget. 
Then, there is an increase in government spending, but 
there is no change in taxes. Show in an IS-LM diagram the 
effect of this policy on output in the short run when the cen-
tral bank keeps the real interest rate constant. How will the 
government finance the increase in government spending?
b. Suppose, as in part a, that the government starts with a 
balanced budget and then increases government spending. 
This time, however, assume that taxes increase by the same 
amount as government spending. Show in an IS-LM dia-
gram the effect of this policy on output in the short run. 
(It may help to recall the discussion of the multiplier in 
Chapter 3. Does government spending or tax policy have 
a bigger multiplier?) How does the output effect compare 
with the effect in part a?
Now suppose Ricardian equivalence holds in this economy. 
[Parts c and d do not require use of diagrams.]
c. Consider again an increase in government spending with 
no change in taxes. How does the output effect compare to 
the output effects in parts a and b?
d. Consider again an increase in government spending com-
bined with an increase in taxes of the same amount. How 
does this output effect compare to the output effects in 
parts a and b?
e. Comment on each of the following statements:
i. “Under Ricardian equivalence, government spending 
has no effect on output.”
ii. “Under Ricardian equivalence, changes in taxes have 
no effect on output.”
EXPLORE FURTHER
7. Consider an economy characterized by the following facts:
i. The debt-to-GDP ratio is 40%.
ii. The primary deficit is 4% of GDP.
iii. The normal growth rate is 3%.
iv. The real interest rate is 3%.
a. Using your favorite spreadsheet software, compute the 
debt-to-GDP ratio in 10 years, assuming that the primary 
deficit stays at 4% of GDP each year; the economy grows at 
the normal growth rate in each year; and the real interest 
rate is constant at 3%.
b. Suppose the real interest rate increases to 5%, but every-
thing else remains as in part a. Compute the debt-to-GDP 
ratio in 10 years.
c. Suppose the normal growth rate falls to 1%, and the 
economy grows at the normal growth rate each year. 
Everything else remains as in part a. Calculate the debt-to-
GDP ratio in 10 years. Compare your answer to part b.
d. Return to the assumptions of part a. Suppose policymak-
ers decide that a debt-to-GDP ratio of more than 50% 
is dangerous. Verify that reducing the primary deficit 
to 1% immediately and that maintaining this deficit for 
10 years will produce a debt-to-GDP ratio of 50% in 10 
years. Thereafter, what value of the primary deficit will be 
required to maintain the debt-to-GDP ratio of 50%?
e. Continuing with part d, suppose policy makers wait 5 
years before changing fiscal policy. For five years, the pri-
mary deficit remains at 4% of GDP. What is the debt-to-
GDP ratio in 5 years? Suppose that after five years, policy 
makers decide to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio to 50%. In 
years 6 through 10, what constant value of the primary 
deficit will produce a debt-to-GDP ratio of 50% at the end 
of year 10?
f. Suppose that policy makers carry out the policy in either 
parts d or e. If these policies reduce the growth rate of out-
put for a while, how will this affect the size of the reduction 
in the primary deficit required to achieve a debt-to-GDP 
ratio of 50% in 10 years?
g. Which policy—the one in part d or the one in part e—
do you think is more dangerous to the stability of the 
economy?
8. The fiscal situation in the United States and in other countries
From the FRED economic database at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, you can retrieve two series: 
General Government Gross Debt of the United States 
(GGGDTAUSA188N) and a measure of the primary deficit 
(USAGGXONLBGDP). Both are measured as a percent of GDP. 
These are measures that incorporate all levels of government. This 
data are constructed by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). 
Using data from the IMF or other international organizations 
helps make a better comparison across countries.
a. What is the ratio of debt to GDP in the United States in the 
most recent available year? Describe the path of this vari-
able in the last decade?
b. What is the change in the ratio of debt-to-GDP in the last 
year of the data? Can the debt-to-GDP ratio fall even if the 
primary deficit is positive?
c. Use the information on the change in the debt-to-GDP ratio 
and the primary deficit ratio to infer the missing term in 
equation (22.5) in the last year of the data. Does your cal-
culation make sense to you?
d. Similar data are constructed for all countries. A con-
venient source that compares the fiscal situation for 
the overall government sector in the G7 countries is 
published by Canada’s Department of Finance in a 
document called the “Fiscal Reference Tables.” The sec-
tion titled International Fiscal Comparisons at the end 
of the document presents the most recent data. Which 
large economy has the highest and lowest ratio of gross 
debt to GDP? Which country has the highest and low-
est deficit as a percent of GDP? Are these overall deficits 
or primary deficits?
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
483


=== PAGE 264 ===
9. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) is required to produce a 
forecast of the federal fiscal situation each year. This question uses 
the version published in January 2019. There is a document entitled 
“A Visual Summary of The Budget and Economic Outlook 2019 to 
2029.” Find the relevant figures that help answer the questions below.
a. Is the federal government expected to be in deficit or sur-
plus over the 10-year horizon?
b. In this presentation do outlays include the interest on the 
debt? Do they include transfers?
c. Is the ratio of debt to GDP expected to rise or fall over the 
10-year horizon?
d. What is the CBO assuming about the term (r-g) in the 
equation describing the change in the debt-to-GDP 
ratio?
FURTHER READINGS
 
■The modern statement of the Ricardian equivalence proposi-
tion is Robert Barro’s “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?”, 
Journal of Political Economy, 1974, 82(6): pp. 1095–1117.
 
■Each year, the Congressional Budget Office publishes The 
Economic and Budget Outlook for the current and future 
 fiscal years. The document provides a clear and unbiased 
presentation of the current US budget, current budget 
issues, and budget trends. Available at www.cbo.gov/.
 
■For more on the German hyperinflation, read Steven 
Webb, Hyperinflation and Stabilization in the Weimar Republic 
(Oxford University Press, 1989).
 
■A good review of what economists know and don’t know 
about hyperinflation is given in Rudiger Dornbusch, 
Federico Sturzenegger, and Holger Wolf, “Extreme 
Inflation: Dynamics and Stabilization,” Brookings Papers 
on Economic Activity, 1990, Vol. 2, pp. 1–84.
 
■For the debate on “fiscal austerity” in Europe, see www.
voxeu.org/debates/has-austerity-gone-too-far.
484 
Back to Policy 
Extensions


=== PAGE 265 ===
485
Monetary Policy:  
A Summing Up
F
or the two decades before the Great Recession, most central banks had converged 
toward a framework for monetary policy, called inflation targeting. It was based on 
two principles: The first was that the primary goal of monetary policy was to keep 
inflation stable and low. The second was that the best way to achieve this goal was 
to follow, explicitly or implicitly, an interest rate rule, allowing the policy rate to respond to 
movements in inflation and in activity.
Until the crisis, this framework appeared to work well. Inflation decreased and remained 
low and stable in most countries. Output fluctuations decreased in amplitude. The period 
became known as the Great Moderation. Many researchers concluded that better monetary 
policy was one of the main factors behind the improvement, consolidating the support for 
this monetary policy framework.
Then the crisis came. It forced macroeconomists and central bankers to reassess along 
at least two dimensions.
The first is the set of issues raised by the liquidity trap. If and when an economy reaches 
the zero lower bound, the policy rate can no longer be used to increase activity. This raises 
two questions: First, can monetary policy be conducted in such a way as to avoid getting 
to the zero lower bound in the first place? Second, once the economy is at the zero lower 
bound, are there other tools that the central bank can use to help increase activity?
The second concerns the mandate of the central bank and the tools of monetary policy. 
From the early 2000s to the start of the crisis, most advanced economies appeared to do 
well, with sustained output growth and stable inflation. Yet, as we saw in Chapter 6, behind 
the scenes not everything was fine. Important changes were taking place in the financial 
system, such as the large increase in leverage and the increased reliance on wholesale fund-
ing by banks. In many countries, also, there were sharp increases in housing prices. These 
factors turned out to be at the source of the crisis. This raises two more questions: Looking 
forward, should the central bank worry not only about inflation and activity but also about 
asset prices, stock market booms, housing booms, and risk in the financial sector? And if 
so, what tools does it have at its disposal?
This chapter reviews what we have learned about monetary policy so far, then describes 
the logic of inflation targeting and the use of an interest rate rule, and finally discusses where 
macroeconomists stand on the issues raised by the crisis.
Section 23-1 takes stock of what we have learned in this book so far.
Section 23-2 describes the inflation-targeting framework.
Section 23-3 reviews the costs and benefits of inflation and draws implications for the 
choice of a target inflation rate.
Section 23-4 describes the monetary policy measures taken by central banks when they 
hit the zero lower bound and since then.
Section 23-5 discusses the potential role of central banks in ensuring financial stability.
23


=== PAGE 266 ===
486 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
23-1  WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED
 
■
In Chapter 4 we looked at money demand and money supply and the determination 
of the interest rate.
We saw how the central bank controls the policy rate through changes in the 
money supply. We saw also that, when the policy rate reaches zero, a case known 
as the liquidity trap or the zero lower bound, further increases in the money supply 
have no effect on the policy rate.
 
■
In Chapter 5 we looked at the short-run effects of monetary policy on output.
We saw that a decrease in the interest rate leads to an increase in spending and, 
in turn, an increase in output. We saw how monetary and fiscal policy can be used to 
affect both the level of output and its composition.
 
■
In Chapter 6, we introduced two important distinctions, first between the nominal 
and the real interest rate and, second, between the borrowing rate and the policy 
rate. The real interest rate is equal to the nominal interest rate minus expected infla-
tion. The borrowing rate is equal to the policy rate plus a risk premium.
We saw that what matters for private spending decisions is the real borrowing 
rate. We discussed how the state of the financial system affects the relation between 
the policy rate and the borrowing rate.
 
■
In Chapter 9 we looked at the effects of monetary policy in the medium run.
We saw that, in the medium run, monetary policy affects neither output nor 
the real interest rate. Output returns to potential, and the real interest rate returns 
to its natural rate, also called the neutral rate or the Wicksellian rate of interest. Higher 
money growth does not affect either output or the real interest rate, but leads to 
higher inflation.
We saw, however, how the zero lower bound may derail this adjustment. High 
unemployment may lead to deflation, which, at the zero lower bound, leads to a 
higher real interest rate, which further decreases demand and further increases 
unemployment.
 
■
In Chapter 14 we introduced another important distinction, between short-term 
and long-term interest rates.
We saw that long term-interest rates depend on expectations of future short-
term rates and a term premium. We saw that stock prices depend on expected future 
short-term rates, future dividends, and an equity premium.
We saw, however, that stock prices may be subject to bubbles or fads, making the 
prices differ from the fundamental values of the stocks.
 
■
In Chapter 16 we looked at the effects of expectations on spending and output, and 
the role of monetary policy in this context.
We saw that monetary policy affects the short-term nominal interest rate, but 
that spending depends on current and expected future short-term real interest rates. 
We saw that the effects of monetary policy on output depend crucially on how 
expectations respond to monetary policy.
 
■
In Chapter 19 we looked at the effects of monetary policy in an economy open in 
both goods markets and financial markets.
If you remember one basic message from this chapter, it should be: Before the cri-
sis, monetary policy had converged to a framework called inflation targeting. The 
crisis has forced a reassessment of both the mandate and of the tools, a reassess-
ment that is still going on. 


=== PAGE 267 ===
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
487
We saw that, in an open economy, monetary policy affects spending and output 
not only through the interest rate but also through the exchange rate. An increase in 
money leads to both a decrease in the interest rate and a depreciation, both of which 
increase spending and output. We saw that, under fixed exchange rates, the central 
bank gives up monetary policy as a policy instrument.
 
■
In Chapter 20 we discussed the pros and cons of flexible exchange rates versus fixed 
exchange rates.
We saw that, under flexible exchange rates, interest rate movements can lead to 
large changes in exchange rates; under fixed exchange rates, speculation can lead to 
an exchange rate crisis and a sharp devaluation. We discussed the pros and cons of 
adopting a common currency such as the euro, or even giving up monetary policy 
altogether through the adoption of a currency board or dollarization.
 
■
In Chapter 21 we looked at the problems facing macroeconomic policy in general, 
and monetary policy in particular.
We saw that uncertainty about the effects of policy should lead to more cau-
tious policies. We saw that even well-intentioned policymakers may sometimes not 
do what is best, and that there is a case to be made for putting restraints on policy-
makers. We also looked at the benefits of having an independent central bank and of 
appointing a conservative central banker.
In this chapter we extend the analysis to look first at the inflation targeting framework in 
place before the crisis, and then at the challenges to monetary policy raised by the crisis.
23-2 FROM MONEY TARGETING  
TO INFLATION TARGETING
One can think of the goals of monetary policy as twofold: First, to maintain low and 
stable inflation; second, to stabilize output around potential—to avoid or at least limit 
recessions or booms.
Money Targeting
Until the 1980s, the strategy was to choose a target rate of money growth and to allow 
for deviations from that target rate as a function of activity. The rationale was simple. A 
low target rate of money growth implied a low average rate of inflation. In recessions, 
the central bank could increase money growth, leading to a decrease in interest rates and 
an increase in output. In booms, the central bank could decrease money growth, leading 
to an increase in interest rates and a slowdown in output.
That strategy did not work well.
First, the relation between money growth and inflation turned out to be far from 
tight, even in the medium run. This is shown in Figure 23-1, which plots 10-year aver-
ages of the US inflation rate against 10-year averages of the growth rate of money from 
1970 to the crisis (the way to read the figure: The numbers for inflation and for money 
growth for 2000, for example, are the average inflation rate and the average growth 
rate of money from 1991 to 2000). The inflation rate is constructed using the consumer 
price index (CPI) as the price index. The growth rate of nominal money is constructed 
using the sum of currency and checkable deposits, known as M1, as the measure for the 
money stock.
The reason for using 10-year averages should be clear. In the short run, changes in 
nominal money growth affect mostly interest rates and output rather than inflation. It 


=== PAGE 268 ===
488 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
From Chapter 5, equation (5.3): 
The real money supply (the left 
side) must be equal to the real 
demand for money (the right 
side):
M
P = Y L1i2
If, as a result of the introduc-
tion of credit cards, the real 
demand for money halves, 
then
M
P = 1
2 Y L1i2
In the short run, P does not 
change, and so the inter-
est rate must adjust. In the 
medium run, P adjusts. For 
a given level of output and 
a given interest rate, M>P 
must halve. Given M, this 
implies that P must double.
c
is only in the medium run that a relation between nominal money growth and inflation 
should emerge. Taking 10-year averages of both nominal money growth and inflation is 
a way of detecting such a medium-run relation. The reason for stopping at the crisis is 
that, as we saw in Chapter 4, when an economy hits the zero lower bound (which the US 
economy did at the end of 2008), increases in the money supply no longer have an effect 
on the policy rate and, by implication, the central bank is no longer able to affect output 
and inflation; so we exclude the period during which the US economy was stuck at the 
zero lower bound.
Figure 23-1 shows that, for the United States, the relation between M1 growth and 
inflation was not tight. True, both went up in the 1970s, and both came down later. But 
note that inflation started declining in the early 1980s, whereas nominal money growth 
remained high for another decade and came down only in the 1990s. Average inflation 
from 1981 to 1990 was down to 4%, while average money growth over the same period 
was still running at 7.5%.
Second, even the relation between the money supply and the interest rate in the short 
run also turned out to be unreliable. This made money growth an unreliable instrument 
to affect demand and output.
Both problems—the poor relation between money growth and inflation in the 
medium run, and the poor relation of the interest rate to the money supply in the short 
run—had the same origin: shifts in the demand for money. An example will help here. 
Suppose, as a result of the introduction of credit cards, people decide to hold only half the 
amount of money they held before; in other words, the real demand for money decreases 
by half. In the short run, at a given price level, this large decrease in the demand for 
money will lead to a large decrease in the interest rate. In other words, we will see a large 
decrease in the interest rate with no change in the money supply. (In terms of Figure 4–2 
in Chapter 4, money demand will shift to the left, leading to a decrease in the equilibrium 
interest rate.) In the medium run, at a given interest rate, the price level will adjust and 
the real money stock will eventually decrease by half. For a given nominal money stock, 
the price level will eventually double. So, even if the nominal money stock remains con-
stant, there will still be a period of inflation as the price level doubles. During this period, 
0
2
4
6
8
10
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
Percent per year
Inflation
M1 Growth
Figure 23-1
M1 Growth and 
Inflation: 10-Year 
Averages, 1970 to 2007
There is no tight relation 
between M1 growth and 
inflation, even in the medium 
run.
Source: FRED: CPIAUSL, M1SL


=== PAGE 269 ===
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
489
there will be no tight relation between nominal money growth (which is zero) and infla-
tion (which would be positive).
Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, these frequent and large shifts in money demand 
created serious problems. Central banks found themselves torn between trying to keep a 
stable target for money growth and staying within announced bands (to maintain cred-
ibility), or adjusting to shifts in money demand (to stabilize the interest rate and output in 
the short run and inflation in the medium run). Starting in the early 1990s, a dramatic 
rethinking of monetary policy took place based on targeting inflation rather than money 
growth and the use of an interest rate rule to achieve it. Let’s look at it more closely.
Inflation Targeting
If one of the main goals of the central bank is to achieve low and stable inflation, why 
not target inflation directly rather than money growth? And if the way to affect activity 
in the short run is to rely on the effect of the interest rate on spending, why not focus 
directly on the interest rate rather than on money growth? This is the reasoning that led 
to the elaboration of inflation targeting. Central banks committed to achieving a target 
inflation rate, and decided to use the interest rate as the instrument to achieve it. Let’s 
look at both parts of the strategy.
Committing to a given inflation target in the medium run is hardly controver-
sial. Trying to achieve a given inflation target in the short run would appear to be 
much more controversial. Focusing exclusively on inflation would seem to eliminate 
any role for monetary policy in reducing output fluctuations. But in fact this is not 
the case.
To see why, return to the Phillips curve relation between inflation, pt, expected infla-
tion, pe
t, and the deviation of the unemployment rate, ut, from the natural rate of unem-
ployment, un (equation (8.10)):
pt = pe
t - a1ut - un2
Let the inflation target be p. Assume that, thanks to the central bank’s reputation, 
this target is credible, so that people expect inflation to be equal to the target. The relation 
becomes:
pt =
 pQ - a1ut - un2
Note that, if the central bank can hit its inflation target exactly, so pt = pQ , unem-
ployment will be equal to its natural rate. By targeting and achieving a constant rate of 
inflation in line with inflation expectations, the central bank also keeps unemployment 
at the natural rate, and by implication keeps output at potential.
Put strongly: Even if policymakers did not care about inflation per se (they do) but 
cared only about output, inflation targeting would still make sense. Keeping inflation 
stable is a way to keep unemployment at the natural rate, or equivalently to keep output 
at potential. This result has been dubbed the divine coincidence. With a Phillips curve 
of the form given in equation (8.10), there is no conflict between keeping inflation con-
stant and keeping output at potential. A focus on keeping stable inflation is thus the right 
approach to monetary policy, in both the short and medium run.
This result is a useful benchmark, but it is too strong. Life is not that nice. The main 
objection is that, as we saw in Chapter 8, the Phillips curve relation is far from an exact 
relation. Rather than try to achieve the target inflation rate each period, at the risk of 
large fluctuations in unemployment, it is better to try to achieve it only over time. So 
most central banks adopted what is called flexible inflation targeting: When inflation 
is away from target, rather than trying to return it to target right away, they adjust the 
interest rate to return to the target inflation rate over time.
b 0 = -a1ut - un2 1
ut = un.


=== PAGE 270 ===
490 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
The Interest Rate Rule
Inflation is not under the direct control of the central bank. The policy rate is. Thus, the 
question is how to set the policy rate to achieve the target rate of inflation. The answer is 
a simple one: When inflation is higher than the target, increase the policy rate to decrease 
demand and the pressure on prices; when it is below the target rate of inflation, decrease 
the policy rate. With this in mind, in the 1990s, John Taylor, at Stanford University, sug-
gested the following rule for the policy rate, a rule now known as the Taylor rule:
 
■
Let pt be the rate of inflation and pQ  be the target rate of inflation.
 
■
Let it be the policy rate, that is, the nominal interest rate controlled by the central 
bank, and i be the target nominal interest rate—the nominal interest rate associated 
with the neutral rate of interest, rn, and the target rate of inflation, pQ , so i = rn + pQ .
 
■
Let ut be the unemployment rate and un be the natural unemployment rate.
Think of the central bank as choosing the nominal interest rate, i. (Recall, from 
Chapter 4, that, through open market operations, and ignoring the liquidity trap, the 
central bank can achieve any short-term nominal interest rate that it wants.) Then, 
Taylor argued, the central bank should use the following rule:
it = i + a1pt - pQ 2 - b1ut - un2
where a and b are positive coefficients chosen by the central bank.
Let’s look at what the rule says:
 
■
If inflation is equal to target inflation 1pt = pQ 2 and the unemployment rate is equal 
to the natural rate of unemployment 1ut = un2, then the central bank should set the 
nominal interest rate, it, equal to its target value, i. This way, the economy can stay 
on the same path, with inflation equal to the target inflation rate and unemploy-
ment equal to the natural rate of unemployment.
 
■
If inflation is higher than the target 1pt 7 pQ 2, the central bank should increase the 
nominal interest rate, it, above i. This higher interest rate will lead to an increase in 
unemployment, and this increase in unemployment will lead to a decrease in infla-
tion. The coefficient a should therefore reflect how much the central bank cares 
about inflation. The higher a, the more the central bank will increase the interest 
rate in response to inflation, the more the economy will slow down, the more unem-
ployment will increase, and the faster inflation will return to the target inflation rate.
 
■
In any case, as Taylor pointed out, a should be larger than one. Why? Because what 
matters for spending is the real interest rate, not the nominal interest rate. When 
inflation increases, the central bank, if it wants to decrease spending and output, 
must increase the real interest rate. In other words, it must increase the nominal 
interest rate more than one-for-one with inflation.
 
■
If unemployment is higher than the natural rate of unemployment 1ut 7 un2, the 
central bank should decrease the nominal interest rate. The lower nominal interest 
rate will lead to an increase in output, leading to a decrease in unemployment. The 
coefficient b should reflect how much the central bank cares about unemployment. 
The higher b, the more the central bank will be willing to deviate from target infla-
tion to keep unemployment close to the natural rate of unemployment.
In stating this rule, Taylor did not argue that it should be followed blindly. Many 
other events, such as an exchange rate crisis or the need to change the composition of 
spending on goods, and thus the mix between monetary policy and fiscal policy, justify 
changing the nominal interest rate for reasons other than those included in the rule. But, 
he argued, the rule provided a useful way of thinking about monetary policy. Once the 
central bank has chosen a target rate of inflation, it should try to achieve it by adjusting 
For a refresher, go back to 
Chapter 9, Section 9-1.
c
Some economists argue that 
the increase in US inflation 
in the 1970s was due to the 
fact that the Fed increased 
the nominal interest rate less 
than one-for-one with infla-
tion. The result, they argue, 
was that an increase in infla-
tion led to a decrease in the 
real interest rate, which led to 
higher demand, lower unem-
ployment, more inflation, a 
further decrease in the real 
interest rate, and so on.
c


=== PAGE 271 ===
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
491
the nominal interest rate. The rule it should follow should consider not only current 
inflation but also current unemployment.
The logic of the rule was convincing, and, by the mid-2000s, most central banks in 
advanced economies had adopted some form of flexible inflation targeting, that is, the 
choice of an inflation target together with the use of an interest rule.
Then the crisis came and raised many questions, about the choice of the inflation 
target, what to do when the interest rate suggested by the interest rule reaches the zero 
lower bound, and whether and how the central bank should worry about financial stabil-
ity in addition to inflation and output. The next section discusses the choice of the infla-
tion target, and the following sections discuss other questions raised by the crisis.
23-3 THE OPTIMAL INFLATION RATE
Table 23-1 shows that inflation steadily decreased in advanced economies from the early 
1980s on. In 1981, average inflation in the OECD was 10.5%; in 2018, it was down 
to 2.3%. In 1981, only two countries (out of the 24 OECD members at the time) had an 
inflation rate below 5%; in 2018, the number had increased to 35 out of 36.
Before the crisis, most central banks aimed for an inflation rate of about 2%. Was 
this the right goal? The answer depends on the costs and benefits of inflation.
The Costs of Inflation
We saw in Chapter 22 that very high inflation, say a rate of 30% per month or more, 
can disrupt economic activity. The debate in advanced economies today, however, is not 
about the costs of inflation rates of 30% or more per month. Rather, it centers on the 
advantages of, say, 0% versus 4% inflation per year. Within that range, economists iden-
tify four main costs of inflation: (1) shoe-leather costs, (2) tax distortions, (3) money illu-
sion, and (4) inflation variability.
Shoe-Leather Costs
Recall from Chapter 9 that, in the medium run, a higher inflation rate leads to a higher 
nominal interest rate and so a higher opportunity cost of holding money. As a result, peo-
ple decrease their money balances by making more trips to the bank—thus the expres-
sion shoe-leather costs. These trips would be avoided if inflation were lower and people 
could be doing other things instead, such as working more or enjoying leisure.
During hyperinflations, shoe-leather costs become quite large. But their importance 
in times of moderate inflation is limited, at best. If an inflation rate of 4% leads people to 
go to the bank, say, one more time every month, or to do one more transaction between 
their money market fund and their checking account each month, this hardly qualifies 
as a major cost of inflation.
The country with inflation 
above 5% is Turkey (15%).
b
Table 23-1 Inflation Rates in the OECD, 1981–2018
Year
1981
1990
2000
2010
2018
OECD average*
10.5%
6.2%
2.8%
1.2%
2.3%
Number of countries with 
inflation below 5%**
2/24
15/24
24/27
27/30
35/36
*Average of GDP deflator inflation rates, using relative GDPs measured at PPP prices as weights.
**The second number denotes the number of member countries at the time.


=== PAGE 272 ===
492 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
Tax Distortions
The second cost of inflation comes from the interaction between the tax system and 
inflation.
Consider, for example, the taxation of capital gains. Taxes on capital gains are typi-
cally based on the change in the price in dollars of the asset between the time it was pur-
chased and the time it is sold. This implies that the higher the rate of inflation, the higher 
the tax. An example will make this clear:
 
■
Suppose inflation has been running at p% a year for the last 10 years.
 
■
Suppose also that you bought your house for $100,000 10 years ago, and you are 
selling it today for $100,000 times 11 + p%210; so its real value is unchanged.
 
■
If the capital gains tax is 30%, the effective tax rate on the sale of your house—defined 
as the ratio of the tax you pay to the price for which you sell your house—is
130%2 100,000 11 + p%210 - 100,000
100,000 11 + p%210
 
■
Because you are selling your house for the same real price at which you bought it, 
your real capital gain is zero, so you should not pay any tax. Indeed, if p = 0—there 
has been no inflation—then the effective tax rate is 0. But if, for example, p = 4%, 
then the effective tax rate is 9.7%: Despite the fact that your real capital gain is zero, 
you end up paying a high tax.
The problems created by the interactions between taxation and inflation extend 
beyond capital gains taxes. Although we know that the real rate of return on an asset 
is the real interest rate, not the nominal interest rate, income for the purpose of income 
taxation includes nominal interest payments, not real interest payments. Or to take yet 
another example, until the early 1980s in the United States, the income levels correspond-
ing to different income tax rates were not increased automatically with inflation. As a 
result, people were pushed into higher tax brackets as their nominal income—but not nec-
essarily their real income—increased over time, an effect known as bracket creep.
You might argue that this cost is not a cost of inflation per se but rather the result 
of a badly designed tax system. In the house example we just discussed, the government 
could eliminate the problem if it indexed the purchase price to the price level—that is, it 
adjusted the purchase price for inflation since the time of purchase—and computed the 
tax on the difference between the sale price and the adjusted purchase price. Under this 
computation, there would be no capital gains and therefore no capital gains tax to pay. 
But because tax codes around the world rarely define the tax base in real terms, the infla-
tion rate matters and leads to distortions.
Money Illusion
The third cost comes from money illusion—the notion that people appear to make 
systematic mistakes in assessing nominal versus real changes in incomes and interest 
rates. A number of computations that would be simple when prices are stable become 
more complicated when there is inflation. When people compare their income this year 
to their income in previous years, they must keep track of the history of inflation. When 
choosing between different assets or deciding how much to consume or save, they must 
keep track of the difference between the real interest rate and the nominal interest rate. 
Casual evidence suggests that many people find these computations difficult and often 
fail to make the relevant distinctions. Economists and psychologists have gathered more 
formal evidence, and it suggests that inflation often leads people and firms to make incor-
rect decisions (see the Focus Box “Money Illusion”). If this is the case, then a seemingly 
simple solution is to have zero inflation.
The numerator of the fraction 
equals the sale price minus 
the purchase price. The 
denominator is the sale price.
c
Some economists argue that 
the costs of bracket creep 
were much larger. As tax 
revenues steadily increased, 
there was little pressure on 
the government to control 
spending. The result, they 
argue, was an increase in the 
overall size of the govern-
ment in the 1960s and 1970s 
far beyond what would have 
been desirable.
c


=== PAGE 273 ===
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
493
Inflation Variability
Yet another cost comes from the fact that higher inflation is typically associated with 
more variable inflation. And more variable inflation means that financial assets such as 
bonds, which promise fixed nominal payments in the future, become riskier.
Take a bond that pays $1,000 in 10 years. With constant inflation over the next 10 
years, not only the nominal value but also the real value of the bond in 10 years is known 
with certainty—we can compute exactly how much a dollar will be worth in 10 years. 
But with variable inflation, the real value of $1,000 in 10 years becomes uncertain. The 
more variability there is, the more uncertainty it creates. Saving for retirement becomes 
more difficult. For those who have invested in bonds, lower inflation than they expected 
means a better retirement; but higher inflation may mean poverty. This is one of the rea-
sons retirees, for whom part of their income is fixed in dollar terms, typically worry more 
about inflation than other groups in the population.
You might argue, as in the case of taxes, that these costs are not due to inflation per 
se but rather to the financial markets’ inability to provide assets that protect their holders 
against inflation. Rather than issuing only nominal bonds (which promise a fixed nomi-
nal amount in the future), governments or firms could also issue indexed bonds—bonds 
that promise a nominal amount adjusted for inflation so people do not have to worry 
about the real value of the bond when they retire. Indeed, as we saw in Chapter 14, 
A good, and sad, movie 
about surviving on a fixed 
pension in post–World War II 
Italy: Umberto D, by Vittorio 
de Sica (1952).
b
Money Illusion
There is a lot of anecdotal evidence that many people fail to 
properly adjust for inflation in their financial computations. 
Recently, economists and psychologists have started look-
ing at money illusion more closely. In a recent study, two 
psychologists, Eldar Shafir at Princeton and Amos Tversky 
at Stanford, and one economist, Peter Diamond at MIT, 
designed a survey aimed at finding out how prevalent money 
illusion is and what causes it. Among the many questions 
they asked of people in various groups (people at Newark 
International Airport, people at two New Jersey shopping 
malls, and a group of Princeton undergraduates) is the 
following:
Suppose Adam, Barbara, and Carlos each received an 
inheritance of $200,000 and each used it immediately to 
purchase a house. Suppose each sold the house one year after 
buying it. Economic conditions were, however, different in 
each case:
 
■
During the time Adam owned the house, there was a 
25% deflation—the prices of all goods and services 
decreased by approximately 25%. A year after he 
bought the house, he sold it for $154,000 (23% less 
than what he had paid).
 
■
During the time Barbara owned the house, there 
was no inflation or deflation—the prices of  all 
goods and services did not change significantly 
 during the year. A year after she bought the house, 
she sold it for $198,000 (1% less than what he had 
paid).
 
■
During the time Carlos owned the house, there was 
a 25% inflation—the prices of all goods and services 
increased by approximately 25%. A year after Carlos 
bought the house, he sold it for $246,000 (23% more 
than what he had paid).
Please rank Adam, Barbara, and Carlos in terms of the 
success of their house transactions. Assign “1” to the person 
who made the best deal and “3” to the person who made the 
worst deal.
In nominal terms, Carlos clearly made the best deal, fol-
lowed by Barbara, followed by Adam. But what is relevant 
is how they did in real terms, adjusting for inflation. In real 
terms, the ranking is reversed. Adam, with a 2% real gain, 
made the best deal, followed by Barbara (with a 1% loss), fol-
lowed by Carlos (with a 2% loss).
The survey’s answers are shown below.
Rank
Adam
Barbara
Carlos
1st
37%
15%
48%
2nd
10%
74%
16%
3rd
53%
11%
36%
Carlos was ranked first by 48% of the respondents, and 
Adam was ranked third by 53% of the respondents. These 
answers suggest that money illusion is prevalent. In other 
words, people (even Princeton undergraduates) have a hard 
time adjusting for inflation.1
FOCUS
1Source: Eldar Shafir, Peter Diamond, and Amos Tversky, “Money Illusion,” in D. Kahneman and A. Tversky, eds., Choices, 
Values, and Frames (New York: Cambridge University Press & Russell Sage Foundation, 2000).


=== PAGE 274 ===
494 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
several countries, including the United States, have introduced such bonds so people can 
better protect themselves against movements in inflation.
The Benefits of Inflation
This may surprise you, but inflation is not all bad. There are three benefits of inflation: 
(1) seignorage, (2) (somewhat paradoxically) the use of the interaction between money 
illusion and inflation in facilitating real wage adjustments, and (3) the option of negative 
real interest rates for macroeconomic policy.
Seignorage
Money creation—the ultimate source of inflation—is one of the ways the government 
can finance its spending. Put another way, money creation is an alternative to borrowing 
from the public or raising taxes.
As we saw in Chapter 22, the government typically does not “create” money 
to pay for its spending. Rather, the government issues and sells bonds and spends the 
proceeds. But if the bonds are bought by the central bank, which then creates money to 
pay for them, the result is the same. Other things being equal, the revenues from money 
creation—that is, seignorage—allow the government to borrow less from the public or to 
lower taxes.
How large is seignorage in practice? During hyperinflations, seignorage often 
becomes an important source of government finance. But its importance in OECD econo-
mies today, and for the range of inflation rates we are considering, is much more limited. 
Take the case of the United States. The ratio of the non-interest-paying money issued by 
the Fed to GDP is around 6%. An increase in the rate of nominal money growth of 4% 
per year (which eventually leads to a 4% increase in the inflation rate) would lead there-
fore to an increase in seignorage of 4% * 6%, or 0.24% of GDP. This is a small amount 
of revenue in exchange for 4% higher inflation.
Therefore, while the seignorage argument is sometimes relevant (for example, in 
economies that do not have a good tax collection system), it hardly seems relevant 
in the discussion of whether OECD countries today should have, say, 0% versus 4% 
inflation.
Money Illusion Revisited
Paradoxically, the presence of money illusion provides at least one argument for having 
a positive inflation rate.
To see why, consider two situations: In the first, inflation is 4% and your wage goes 
up by 1% in nominal terms—in dollars. In the second, inflation is 0% and your wage goes 
down by 3% in nominal terms. Both lead to the same 3% decrease in your real wage, so 
you should be indifferent. The evidence, however, shows that many people will accept the 
real wage cut more readily in the first case than in the second case.
Why is this example relevant to our discussion? As we saw in Chapter 13, the con-
stant process of change that characterizes modern economies means some workers must 
sometimes take a real pay cut. Thus, the argument goes, the presence of inflation allows 
for these downward real wage adjustments more easily than if inflation is equal to zero. 
The evidence on the distribution of wage changes in Portugal under high and low infla-
tion in Chapter 8 suggests that this is indeed a relevant argument.
The Option Of Negative Real Interest Rates
Higher inflation decreases the probability of hitting the zero lower bound. This argu-
ment, which may be the most important, follows from our discussion of the zero lower 
bound in Chapter 4. A numerical example will help here.
Recall equation (22.6): Let H 
denote the monetary base—
the money issued by the 
central bank. Then
Seignorage
Y
= ∆H
PY = ∆H
H  H
PY
where ∆H>H is the rate of 
growth of the monetary 
base, and H>PY is the ratio 
of the monetary base to 
nominal GDP.
c
Note that I say “non–interest-
paying money.” This is 
because one of the changes 
triggered by the crisis is that 
many central banks now 
issue both non-interest-
paying money and interest-
paying money. More on this 
in Section 23-4. Given that 
interest-paying money bal-
ances pay an interest rate 
similar to that on bonds, they 
are like bonds and do not 
yield seignorage revenue.
c
A conflict of metaphors: 
Because inflation makes 
these real wage adjustments 
easier to achieve, some econ-
omists say inflation “greases 
the wheels” of the economy. 
Others, emphasizing the 
adverse effects of inflation on 
relative prices, say that infla-
tion “puts sand” in the work-
ings of the economy.
c


=== PAGE 275 ===
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
495
 
■
Consider two economies, both with a natural real interest rate equal to 2%.
 
■
In the first economy, the central bank maintains an average inflation rate of 4%, so 
the nominal interest rate is on average equal to 2% + 4% = 6%.
 
■
In the second economy, the central bank maintains an average inflation rate of 0%, 
so the nominal interest rate is on average equal to 2% + 0% = 2%.
 
■
Suppose both economies are hit by a similar adverse shock, which leads, at 
a given interest rate, to a decrease in spending and a decrease in output in the 
short run.
 
■
In the first economy, the central bank can decrease the nominal interest rate 
from 6% to 0% before it hits the liquidity trap, thus achieving a decrease of 6%. 
Under the assumption that expected inflation does not change immediately and 
remains equal to 4%, the real interest rate decreases from 2% to -4%.This is 
likely to have a strong positive effect on spending and help the economy recover.
 
■
In the second economy, the central bank can decrease the nominal interest rate only 
from 2% to 0%, a decrease of 2%. Under the assumption that expected inflation does 
not change right away and remains equal to 0%, the real interest rate decreases only 
by 2%, from 2% to 0%. This small decrease in the real interest rate may not increase 
spending by very much.
In short, an economy with a higher average inflation rate has more room to use 
monetary policy to fight a recession. An economy with a low average inflation rate may 
find itself unable to use monetary policy to return output to the natural level of output. 
As we saw in Chapter 6, this possibility is far from being just theoretical. At the start 
of the crisis, central banks quickly hit the zero lower bound, unable to decrease inter-
est rates further. With this experience in mind, the question is whether this should lead 
central banks to choose higher average inflation in the future. Some economists argue 
that the Great Recession was an exceptional event, that it is unlikely that countries will 
face a liquidity trap again in the future, and so there is no need to adopt a higher average 
inflation rate. Others, and this includes me, argue that the problems faced by a country 
in a liquidity trap are so serious that we should avoid taking the risk that it happens 
again, and that a higher target rate of inflation is in fact justified. What is undisputed, 
though, is that permanently low inflation reduces the central bank’s ability to affect the 
real interest rate.
The Optimal Inflation Rate: The State of the Debate
At this stage, most central banks in advanced economies have an inflation target of 
about 2%. But they are being challenged on two fronts: Some economists want to achieve 
price stability—that is, 0% inflation. Others want, instead, a higher target rate of infla-
tion, say 4%.
Those who want to aim for 0% make the point that 0% is a different target rate from 
all others; it corresponds to price stability. This is desirable in itself. Knowing that the 
price level will be roughly the same in 10 or 20 years as it is today simplifies a number of 
complicated decisions and eliminates the scope for money illusion. Also, given the time 
consistency problem facing central banks (discussed in Chapter 21), the credibility and 
simplicity of the target inflation rate are important. Some economists and some central 
bankers believe price stability—that is, a 0% target—can achieve these goals better than 
a target inflation rate of 2%. So far, however, no central bank has actually adopted a 0% 
inflation target.
Those who want to aim for a higher rate argue that it is essential not to fall in the 
liquidity trap in the future, and that, for these purposes, a higher target rate of inflation, 
say 4%, would be helpful. They argue that the choice of a 2% target was based on the 


=== PAGE 276 ===
496 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
belief that countries would be unlikely to hit the zero lower bound, and that this belief 
has proven false. Their argument has gained little support among central bankers, who 
argue that if central banks increase their target from its current value of 2% to 4%, peo-
ple may start anticipating that the target will soon become 5%, then 6%, and so on, and 
inflation expectations will no longer be anchored. Thus, they see it as essential to keep 
current target levels.
The debate goes on. For the time being, most central banks continue to aim for low 
but positive inflation—that is, inflation rates of about 2%.
23-4 UNCONVENTIONAL MONETARY 
POLICY
When, at the start of the crisis, the interest rate reached the zero lower bound, central 
banks were unable to decrease it further and thus lost the use of conventional mon-
etary policy. In this book, I have assumed until now that monetary policy became impo-
tent. But this was a simplification. Central banks explored other ways to affect activity, a 
set of measures known as unconventional monetary policy.
The idea was simple. While the policy rate was equal to zero, other interest rates 
remained positive, reflecting various risk premiums. Although I introduced a risk pre-
mium in Chapter 6 in the relation of the borrowing rate to the policy rate, I did not discuss 
in detail what it depended on and how it could be affected by monetary policy. In fact, we 
can think of the premium on an asset as determined by supply and demand for the asset. 
If the demand for an asset decreases, whether because buyers become more risk averse 
or because some investors just decide not to hold the asset, the premium will increase. 
If, instead, the demand increases, the premium will decrease. This is true whether the 
increased demand comes from private investors or from the central bank.
This is the logic that led central banks to buy assets (other than short-term bonds) 
with the intention of decreasing the premium on them and thus decreasing the corre-
sponding borrowing rates with the aim of stimulating economic activity. They did this 
by financing their purchases through money creation, leading to a large increase in the 
money supply. Although the increase in the money supply had no effect on the policy 
rate, the purchase of these other assets decreased their premium, leading to lower bor-
rowing rates and higher spending. These purchase programs are known as quantitative 
easing, or credit easing, policies.
In the United States, the Fed started its first quantitative easing program in November 
2008, even before it had reached the zero lower bound. In what has become known as 
Quantitative Easing 1 (QE1 for short), the Fed started buying certain types of mortgage-
based securities. We saw the reason for it in Chapter 6: One of the triggers of the cri-
sis was the difficulty of assessing the value of the underlying mortgages on which those 
securities were based; as a result, many investors had decided to stop holding any kind 
of mortgage-based security, and the premium even on securities that seemed relatively 
safe had jumped to very high levels. By buying these securities, the Fed decreased their 
premium and limited the effect on the financial system and on spending. The second 
quantitative easing program, known as QE2, started in November 2010, when the Fed 
starting buying longer-term Treasury bonds, with the intent of decreasing the term pre-
mium on these long-term bonds. The third quantitative easing program, QE3, started in 
September 2012, with the further purchase of mortgage-based securities, to decrease 
the cost of mortgages and further help the housing market to recover.
Much research has gone into assessing the effectiveness of quantitative easing 
in reducing risk premia. There is wide agreement that QE1 made a large difference. 
This reasoning, which applies 
to many other issues, is 
called the “slippery slope” 
argument.
c


=== PAGE 277 ===
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
497
By intervening in a market that had become dysfunctional, the Fed limited the increase in 
premiums. The effects of QE2 and QE3, in which the Fed intervened in markets that were 
no longer dysfunctional, are more controversial. It is widely accepted that they decreased 
the term premium on long-term government bonds. The question is by how much.
The general assessment of quantitative easing policies, in the United States and 
elsewhere, is that they had some effect on borrowing rates, and thus monetary policy 
can still have some effect on activity even at the zero lower bound. But there is also wide 
agreement that they work in more complicated and less reliable ways than conventional 
monetary policy. Put another way, the zero lower bound may not make monetary policy 
impotent, but it surely limits its efficiency.
We have looked at what the Fed bought. How did it finance itself? By issuing money. 
As the interest rate was (nearly) equal to zero, banks were indifferent between holding 
bonds or holding money. So they were willing to accumulate central bank money in the 
form of reserves at the Fed. (Actually the Fed was willing to pay a slightly positive inter-
est rate, 0.25%, which made it attractive for banks to hold reserves.) As a result, the 
monetary base, i.e., the money issued by the central bank increased from $850 billion, 
or about 6.6% of GDP in September 2008, to $4,000 billion, or about 22% of GDP in 
2015. This evolution is represented by the red line in Figure 23-2. The blue line shows 
the reserves held by banks; most of the increase was reflected in an increase in bank 
reserves at the Fed. As a result, the balance sheet of the Fed is much larger than it was 
before the crisis.
Monetary Policy since the End of the Liquidity Trap
When the Fed decided at the end of 2015 that the economy was stronger and it should 
increase the federal funds rate again, it faced an obvious problem. If it continued to pay 
zero interest on reserves (or, more precisely, to pay a very low one), banks would not be 
willing to hold reserves. They would try to sell all of them in the federal funds market, 
and, unless the Fed was willing to buy back all of them—and by implication, to sell all the 
bonds it had accumulated as a result of QE—the federal funds rate would go back to zero. 
If the Fed did not want this to happen, it had to start paying interest on reserves. And this 
is what it did, and still does today.
The Fed now operates a corridor system. It sets two rates: the rate on reserves, the 
rate at which banks can in effect lend to the Fed; and the discount rate, the rate at which 
banks can borrow from the Fed. The federal funds rate is still determined in the federal 
funds market, but it must be in the corridor created by the two rates. To see why, suppose 
The Fed did not want to sell 
all the assets it had acquired 
during the crisis right away. 
It thought, rightly, that this 
would lead to large disrup-
tions in the asset markets, 
and selling should happen 
slowly over time, if at all.
b
0.000
0.500
1.000
1.500
2.000
2.500
3.000
3.500
4.000
4.500
Trillions of dollars
Reserves at the Fed
Monetary base
2005-01
2005-09
2006-05
2007-01
2007-09
2008-05
2009-01
2009-09
2010-05
2011-01
2011-09
2012-05
2013-01
2013-09
2014-05
2015-01
2015-09
2016-05
2017-01
2017-09
2018-05
2019-01
Figure 23-2
The Evolution of the US 
Monetary Base from 
2005 to 2018
As a result of quantita-
tive easing, the monetary 
base more than quadrupled 
between 2005 and 2015.
Source: FRED: RESBALS 
BOGMBASE


=== PAGE 278 ===
498 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
that the federal funds rate was lower than the rate on reserves: No bank would be willing to 
lend to another bank, as lending to the Fed would give a higher rate. Suppose instead that 
the federal funds rate was higher than the discount rate: no bank would want to borrow 
from another bank, as borrowing from the Fed would give a lower rate. Thus, while the 
federal funds rate is still determined in the federal funds market, it can vary only within the 
corridor created by the two rates. The evolution of the three rates is shown in Figure 23-3, 
and it shows how the federal funds rate has moved with the interest rate paid on reserves.
To summarize: Monetary policy is in flux. The crisis forced central bankers in general, 
and the Fed in particular, to question the focus on inflation targeting and to explore tools 
other than the policy rate. As a result of the use of unconventional policies during the zero 
lower bound period, central banks’ balance sheets are much larger than they used to be. They 
hold a much larger quantity of assets than before the crisis and have much larger liabilities. 
They pay interest on a large part of their liabilities, the reserves held by banks at the central 
bank. The main policy tool has become the interest rate paid to banks on their reserves at the 
Fed. The main choice facing central banks at this point is whether to keep their large balance 
sheets, or to return to a situation closer to the precrisis situation, with a small balance sheet 
and mostly non–interest-paying liabilities. While they have in most cases either stabilized or 
started to decrease their balance sheets, the endpoint has not been decided yet.
23-5 MONETARY POLICY AND FINANCIAL 
STABILITY
When the financial crisis started, central banks were confronted not only with a major 
decline in demand but also with serious problems in the financial system. As we saw in 
Chapter 6, the decline in housing prices had been the trigger for the crisis, which was 
then amplified by failures of the financial system. Opacity of assets led to doubts about 
the solvency of financial institutions, and these doubts led to runs, in which investors 
tried to get their funds back, forcing fire sales and generating further doubts about sol-
vency. The first urgent issue facing the central banks was thus what measures to take—
beyond the measures already described in the previous sections. The second issue was 
whether and how, in the future, monetary policy should try to decrease the probability of 
another such financial crisis. We look at both issues in turn.
Contrary to the argument in 
the text, you can see that 
the federal funds rate has 
remained slightly below the 
interest rate on reserves! This 
is because of a technical 
issue: Some financial institu-
tions do not have access to 
Fed reserves and are willing 
to lend at a lower rate than 
the rate on reserves. The 
general message remains: 
The floor on the federal funds 
rate is mostly determined by 
the rate on reserves.
c
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
Interest rate on reserves
Federal funds rate
Discount rate
2015-01
2015-04
2015-07
2015-10
2016-01
2016-04
2016-07
2016-10
2017-01
2017-04
2017-07
2017-10
2018-01
2018-04
2018-07
2018-10
2019-01
Figure 23-3
The Interest Rate on 
Reserves, the Federal 
Funds Rate, and the 
Discount Rate since 
2015
The federal funds rate has 
moved in line with the inter-
est rate on reserves.
Source: FRED: IOER, FEDFUNDS, 
INTDSRUSM193N


=== PAGE 279 ===
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
499
Liquidity Provision and Lender of Last Resort
Central banks have long known about bank runs. As we saw in Chapter 6, the structure 
of the balance sheet of banks exposes them to runs. Many of their assets, such as loans, 
are illiquid. Many of their liabilities, such as demand deposits, are liquid; as the term indi-
cates, demand deposits can be withdrawn on demand. Thus, depositors’ worries, founded 
or unfounded, can lead them to want to withdraw their funds, forcing the bank either to 
close or to sell the assets at fire sale prices. In most countries, two measures have tradi-
tionally been taken to limit such runs:
 
■
Deposit insurance, which gives investors the confidence that they will get their 
funds back even if the bank is insolvent, so that they do not have an incentive to 
run.
 
■
And, in case the run actually happens, the provision of liquidity by the central bank 
to the bank against some collateral, namely some of the assets of the bank. This way, 
the bank can get the liquidity it needs to pay the depositors without having to sell the 
assets. This function of the central bank is known as lender of last resort, and it 
has been one of the functions of the Fed since its creation in 1913.
What the crisis showed, however, was that banks were not the only financial institu-
tions that could be subject to runs. Any institution whose assets are less liquid than its 
liabilities is exposed to similar risks of a run. If investors want their funds back, it may be 
difficult for the financial institution to get the liquidity it needs. Given the urgency during 
the crisis, the Fed extended liquidity provision to some financial institutions other than 
banks. It had little choice other than to do so, but, looking forward, the question is what 
the rules should be—which institutions can expect to receive liquidity from the central 
bank and which cannot. The question is far from settled. Do central banks really want to 
provide such liquidity to institutions they do not regulate?
Macroprudential Tools
Starting in the mid-2000s, the Fed became worried about the increase in housing 
prices. But the Fed and other central banks facing similar housing price increases were 
reluctant to intervene. This was for a number of reasons: First, they found it difficult to 
assess whether the price increases reflected increases in fundamentals (e.g., low interest 
rates) or a bubble (i.e., increases in prices above what were justified by fundamentals). 
Second, they worried that an increase in the interest rate, although it might indeed 
stop the increase in housing prices, would also slow the whole economy and trigger a 
recession. Third, they thought that, even if the increase in housing prices was indeed a 
bubble, and the bubble were to burst and lead to a decrease in housing prices later, they 
could counter the adverse effects on demand through an appropriate decrease in the 
interest rate.
The crisis has forced them to reconsider. As we saw, housing price declines combined 
with the buildup of risk in the financial system led to a major financial and macroeco-
nomic crisis, which they could neither avoid nor counter.
As a result, a broad consensus is emerging along two lines:
 
■
It is risky to wait. Even if there is doubt about whether an increase in asset prices 
reflects fundamentals or a bubble, it may be better to do something than nothing. 
Better to stand for a while in the way of a fundamental increase and turn out to be 
wrong than to let a bubble build up and burst, with major adverse macroeconomic 
effects. The same applies to buildups of financial risk; for example, excessive bank 
leverage. Better to prevent high leverage, even at the risk of decreasing bank credit, 
than to allow it to build up, increasing the risk of a financial crisis.
This has led to the dictum: 
Better lean [against increases 
in asset prices] than clean 
[up after asset prices have 
crashed].
b


=== PAGE 280 ===
500 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
 
■
To deal with bubbles, credit booms, or dangerous behavior in the financial sys-
tem, the interest rate is not, however, the right policy instrument. It is too blunt a 
tool, affecting the whole economy rather than resolving the problem at hand. The 
right instruments are macroprudential tools, rules that are aimed directly at 
borrowers, or lenders, or banks and other financial institutions, as the case may 
require.
What form might some of the macroprudential tools take? Some tools may be aimed 
at borrowers:
 
■
Suppose the central bank is worried about what it perceives to be an excessive increase 
in housing prices. It can tighten conditions under which borrowers can obtain mort-
gages. A measure used in many countries is a ceiling on the size of the loan bor-
rowers can take relative to the value of the house they buy, a measure known as the 
maximum loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, or maximum LTV for short. Reducing the 
maximum LTV is likely to decrease demand and thus slow down the price increase. 
(The Focus Box “LTV Ratios and Housing Price Increases from 2000 to 2007” exam-
ines the relation between maximum LTVs and housing price increases in the period 
leading up to the crisis.)
 
■
Suppose the central bank is worried that people are borrowing too much in for-
eign currency. An example will help to make the point. In the early 2010s, more 
than two-thirds of mortgages in Hungary were denominated in Swiss francs! 
The reason was simple. Swiss interest rates were very low, making it apparently 
attractive for Hungarians to borrow at the Swiss rather than the Hungarian 
interest rate. The risk that borrowers did not consider, however, was that the 
Hungarian currency, the forint, would depreciate vis-à-vis the Swiss franc. Such 
a depreciation took place, increasing, on average, the real value of the mortgages 
Hungarians had to pay by more than 50%. Many households could no longer 
make their mortgage payments. This suggests that it would have been wise to put 
restrictions from the start on the amount of borrowing in foreign currency by 
households.
Some tools may be aimed at lenders, such as banks or foreign investors:
 
■
Suppose the central bank is worried about an increase in bank leverage. We saw in 
Chapter 6 why this should be a concern. High leverage was one of the main reasons 
why housing price declines led to the financial crisis. The central bank can impose 
minimum capital ratios to limit leverage. These may take various forms (for example, 
a minimum value for the ratio of capital to all assets, or a minimum value for the 
ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets, with riskier assets having a higher weight). In 
fact, in a series of agreements known as Basel II and Basel III, many countries have 
agreed to impose the same minimums on their banks. A more difficult and unre-
solved issue is whether and how such capital ratios should be adjusted over time as a 
function of economic and financial conditions (whether, for example, they should be 
increased if there appears to be excessive credit growth).
 
■
Suppose the central bank is worried about high capital inflows, as, for example, in 
the Hungarian case we just discussed. The central bank worries that, although inves-
tors are willing to lend at low interest rates to the country, they may change their 
mind, and this might lead to a sudden stop. The central bank may then want to limit 
the capital inflows by imposing capital controls on inflows. These may take the 
form of taxes on different types of inflows, with lower taxes on capital flows that are 
less prone to sudden stops, such as foreign direct investment (the purchase of 
physical assets by foreigners), or a direct limit on the ability of domestic residents to 
take out foreign loans.
This led the Hungarian 
government to allow for a 
conversion of mortgages in 
Swiss francs to mortgages in 
forints at a better exchange 
rate. Hungarian households 
were better off, but the banks 
that loaned to them were 
worse off.
c
Go back to Chapter 6 for 
a refresher on the relation 
between leverage and capital 
ratios.
c
See the Focus Box “Sudden 
Stops, Safe Havens, and the 
Limits to the Interest Parity 
Condition” in Chapter 19. c


=== PAGE 281 ===
LTV Ratios and Housing Price Increases 
from 2000 to 2007
Is it the case that countries that had more stringent restric-
tions on borrowing had lower housing price increases from 
2000 to 2007? An answer is given in Figure 1. The figure, 
taken from an IMF study, shows the evidence for 21 coun-
tries for which the data could be obtained.
The horizontal axis plots the maximum loan-to-value 
(LTV) ratio on new mortgages across countries. This max-
imum is not necessarily a legal maximum but may be a 
guideline, or a limit over which additional requirements, 
such as mortgage insurance, may be asked of  the bor-
rower. A ratio of  100% means that a borrower may be able 
to get a loan equal to the value of  the house. Actual val-
ues vary from 60% in Korea; to 100% in many countries, 
including the United States; to 125% in the Netherlands. 
The vertical axis plots the increase in the nominal price 
of  housing from 2000 to 2007 (measuring the real price 
increase would lead to a similar picture). The figure also 
plots the regression line, the line that best fits the set of 
observations.
The figure suggests two conclusions:
The first is that there indeed appears to be a positive rela-
tion between the LTV ratio and the housing price increase. 
Korea and Hong Kong, which both imposed low LTV ratios, 
had smaller housing price increases. Spain and the United 
Kingdom, with much higher ratios, had much larger price 
increases.
The second is that the relation is far from tight. This 
should not come as a surprise, as surely many other factors 
played a role in the increase in housing prices. But even con-
trolling for other factors, it is difficult to identify with much 
confidence the precise effect of the LTV ratio. Looking for-
ward, we shall have to learn a lot more about how an LTV-
based regulatory tool might work before it can be used as a 
reliable macroprudential tool.2
FOCUS
Australia 
Belgium
Canada              
Denmark             
Finland
France
Germany
Hong Kong
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Maximum LTV allowed
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland         
United Kingdom      
United States
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
240
220
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
y 5 1.3x 2 46.7
Nominal house price increase from 2000 to 2007
(percent)
Figure 1
Maximum LTV Ratios and Housing Price Increases, 2000–2007
Although there is wide agreement that the use of such macroprudential tools is desir-
able, many questions remain:
 
■
In many cases, we do not know how well these tools work (e.g., how much a decrease 
in the maximum LTV ratio affects the demand for housing, or whether foreign inves-
tors can find ways of avoiding capital controls).
2Source: Christopher Crowe, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Deniz Igan, and Pau Rabanal, “Policies for Macrofinancial Stability: 
Options to Deal with Real Estate Booms,” Staff Discussion Note, International Monetary Fund, February 2011.
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
501


=== PAGE 282 ===
 
■
There are likely to be complex interactions between the traditional monetary pol-
icy tools and these macroprudential tools. For example, there is some evidence 
that very low interest rates lead to excessive risk taking, whether by investors or by 
financial institutions. If this is the case, a central bank that decides, for macroeco-
nomic reasons, to lower the interest rate may have to use various macroprudential 
tools to offset the potential increase in risk taking. Again, we know little about how 
best to do it.
 
■
The question arises of whether macroprudential tools, together with traditional 
monetary policy tools, should be under the control of the central bank or of a 
separate authority. The argument for having the central bank in charge of both 
monetary and macroprudential tools is that these tools interact, and thus only 
one centralized authority can use them in the right way. The argument against it 
is that such a consolidation of tools may give too much power to an independent 
central bank.
At this stage, some countries have taken one route and others have taken another. 
In the United Kingdom, the central bank has been given power over both monetary 
and macroprudential tools. In the United States, the responsibility has been given to 
a council under the formal authority of the US Treasury, but with the Fed playing a 
major role within the council.
To summarize: The crisis has shown that macroeconomic stability requires the use 
not only of traditional monetary instruments but also of macroprudential tools. How 
best to use them is one of the challenges facing macroeconomic policymakers today.
SUMMARY
 
■Until the 1980s, the design of monetary policy focused 
on nominal money growth. But because of the poor rela-
tion between inflation and nominal money growth, this 
approach was abandoned by most central banks.
 
■Central banks now focus on an inflation rate target rather 
than a nominal money growth rate target. And they think 
about monetary policy in terms of choosing the nomi-
nal interest rate rather than choosing the rate of nominal 
money growth.
 
■The Taylor rule gives a useful way of thinking about the 
choice of the nominal interest rate. The rule states that 
the central bank should move its interest rate in response 
to two main factors: the deviation of the inflation rate 
from the target rate of inflation, and the deviation of 
the unemployment rate from the natural rate of unem-
ployment. A central bank that follows this rule will sta-
bilize activity and achieve its target inflation rate in the 
medium run.
 
■The optimal rate of inflation depends on the costs and ben-
efits of inflation. Higher inflation leads to more distortions, 
especially when it interacts with the tax system. On the 
other hand, because higher inflation implies higher average 
nominal interest rates, it decreases the probability of hitting 
the zero lower bound, a bound that was costly in the recent 
crisis.
 
■When advanced economies hit the zero lower bound dur-
ing the Great Financial Crisis, central banks explored 
unconventional monetary policy tools, such as quantita-
tive easing. These policies worked through the effects of 
central bank purchases on the risk premiums associated 
with different assets. These purchases led to large increases 
in the balance sheets of central banks. The issue is now 
whether the central banks should reduce those balance 
sheets, and whether unconventional measures should be 
used in normal times.
 
■The crisis has shown that stable inflation is not a sufficient 
condition for macroeconomic stability. This is leading cen-
tral banks to explore the use of macroprudential tools. These 
tools can, in principle, help limit bubbles, control credit 
growth, and decrease risk in the financial system. How best 
to use them, however, is still poorly understood and is one 
the challenges facing monetary policy today.
502 
Back to Policy 
Extensions


=== PAGE 283 ===
KEY TERMS
inflation targeting, 485
interest rate rule, 485
Great Moderation, 485
M1, 487
divine coincidence, 489
flexible inflation targeting, 489
Taylor rule, 490
shoe-leather costs, 491
bracket creep, 492
money illusion, 492
conventional monetary policy, 496
unconventional monetary policy, 496
quantitative easing, 496
credit easing, 496
QE1, 496
QE2, 496
QE3, 496
corridor system, 497
lender of last resort, 499
macroprudential tools, 500
loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, 500
Basel II, 500
Basel III, 500
capital controls, 500
foreign direct investment, 500
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using the information in this chapter, label each of the following 
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. The most important argument in favor of a positive rate of 
inflation in OECD countries is seignorage.
b. Fighting inflation should be the Fed’s only purpose.
c. Inflation and money growth moved together from 1970 to 
2009.
d. Because most people have little trouble distinguishing 
between nominal and real values, inflation does not distort 
decision making.
e. Most central banks around the world have an inflation tar-
get of 4%.
f. The higher the inflation rate, the higher the effective tax 
rate on capital gains.
g. The Taylor rule describes how central banks adjust the pol-
icy interest rate across recessions and booms.
h. The zero lower bound on the nominal policy rate was 
expected to be a regular feature of monetary policy when 
inflation targeting began.
i. The Federal Reserve pays interest on reserves held by mem-
ber banks.
j. Quantitative easing refers to central bank purchases of 
assets with the intention of directly affecting the yield on 
these assets.
k. In the crisis, central banks provided liquidity to financial 
institutions they did not regulate.
l. One consequence of the crisis was higher capital require-
ments and a more extensive regulatory regime for banks.
2. Breaking the link between money growth and inflation in the 
medium run
The money demand relationship in Chapter 4 is used implicitly 
in Figure 23-1. That relation is
M
P = Y  L1i2
The central bank in conjunction with the political authorities 
chooses an inflation target p *.
a. Derive the target nominal interest rate in a medium-run 
equilibrium.
b. Consider medium-run equilibria where potential output 
does not grow. Derive the relation between money growth 
and inflation. Explain.
c. Now consider medium-run equilibria where potential out-
put grows at 3% per year. Now derive the relation between 
money growth and inflation. Do you expect inflation to be 
higher or lower than money growth? Explain.
d. Consider Figure 23-1. Look first at the period ending in 
roughly 1995. How do your results in parts b and c relate 
to it?
e. Focus on the case where all money is currency. We can 
then think of money demand as being the demand for cur-
rency (you can refer back to the appendix to Chapter 4 if 
needed). Over the past 50 years:
i. Automatic tellers have allowed cash to be dispensed 
outside of regular banking hours.
ii. The use of credit cards for purchases has greatly expanded.
iii. The use of debit cards for purchases has greatly expanded.
iv. Most recently, technology has allowed for small pur-
chases by credit and debit cards by waving the card 
over a payment terminal near the cash register.
How would each of these innovations affect the demand 
for currency?
f. The FRED database at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
has an annual series for currency (CURRVALALL). Download 
this series and the annual series for nominal GDP (GDPA). 
Construct a ratio of currency to nominal GDP. How does this 
series behave from 1993 to 2018? Are you surprised?
3. The inflation target: Nearly every major central bank has chosen 
an inflation target of 2%.
a. Why might a central bank choose a lower inflation target, 
for example, zero inflation?
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
503


=== PAGE 284 ===
b. Why might a central bank choose a higher inflation target, 
for example, 4% inflation?
4. Indexed bonds and inflation uncertainty
In Chapter 14, in the Focus Box titled “The Vocabulary of 
Bond Markets,” the concept of an inflation-indexed bond was 
introduced. Although such bonds are typically long in maturity, the 
example that follows compares a standard one-year Treasury bill 
with an inflation-indexed one-year Treasury bill.
a. A standard one-year $100 Treasury bill promises to 
pay $100 in one year and sells for $PB (notation is from 
Chapter 4) today. What is the nominal interest rate on the 
Treasury bill?
b. Suppose that the price level is P today and P1t+12 next year 
and the bill sells for $PB today. What is the real interest rate 
on the Treasury bill?
c. An indexed Treasury bill pays a larger payment next 
year to compensate for inflation between the date of 
issue and the date of payment. If the bill is issued today 
when the price index is 100, what will be the payment 
next year if the price index has risen to 110? What is the 
real interest rate on an indexed Treasury bill that sells 
for $PB today?
d. If you are an investor, will you want to hold indexed or 
non-indexed bonds?
5. Unwinding unconventional monetary policy
It was noted in the text that the Federal Reserve purchased, in 
addition to Treasury bills, large amounts of mortgage-backed secu-
rities and long-term government bonds as part of quantitative eas-
ing. Figure 23-2 shows that in 2015, there were about $4 trillion 
of assets in the monetary base. By 2018, total assets fell to $3.5 
trillion. The table below presents some further detail on three types 
of Federal Reserve assets in billions of dollars.
Asset category
End of 2015
End of 2017
Treasury securities less than 
one year to maturity
 216.1
 443.7
Treasury securities with more 
than one year to maturity
2245.4
2010.5
Mortgage-backed securities
1747.5
1764.9
Source: Annual Reports of the Federal Reserve Board, Table 2, Federal 
Reserve Bank holdings of US Treasury and federal agency securities
a. Why did the Federal Reserve Board buy the mortgage-
backed securities?
b. Why did the Federal Reserve Board buy the long-term 
Treasury bonds?
c. What would you predict as the consequences of the follow-
ing operation by the Federal Reserve Board: selling $0.5 
trillion in mortgage-backed securities and buying $0.5 
trillion in Treasury securities with less than one year to 
maturity?
d. What would you predict as the consequences of the fol-
lowing operation by the Federal Reserve Board: selling 
$0.5 trillion in Treasury securities with maturity longer 
than one year and buying $0.5 trillion in Treasury securi-
ties with less than one year to maturity?
e. How did the Fed rearrange its balance sheet between 2015 
and 2017? Is there evidence of unwinding of quantitative 
easing?
6. The maximum loan-to-value ratio
Most home-buyers purchase their home with a combination 
of a cash down payment and a mortgage. The loan-to-value ratio is 
a rule that establishes the maximum mortgage loan allowed on a 
home purchase.
a. If a home costs $300,000 and the maximum loan-to-
value ratio is 80% as in Denmark, what is the minimum 
down payment?
b. If the maximum loan-to-value is reduced, how will this 
affect the demand for homes?
c. In Chapter 14 you were referred to The Economist House 
Price Index. Find that index and look at the behavior of 
house prices in Canada and the United States from 1970 
to the latest date available. On December 10, 2015, the 
Canadian Minister of Finance announced an increase in 
the minimum down payment on any portion of a mort-
gage more than $500,000. (The announcement can be 
found at www.fin.gc.ca/n15/15-088-eng.asp.) Why was 
this action taken? Do you see an effect on house prices in 
Canada? What do you conclude?
7. Bank behavior in the interest rate corridor
The United States (unlike other countries) has two types of 
bank-like financial institutions. Member banks can borrow from 
the Federal Reserve at the discount rate and must keep currency in 
their vaults or deposits at the Federal Reserve earning the deposit 
rate as reserves. These rates are shown in Figure 22-3. Non-
member banks can hold their reserves as currency or deposits at 
member banks. The federal funds rate is the interest rate on one-
day loans in financial markets. It is determined by the demand for 
and the supply of  these funds by both member and non-member 
banks. Chapter 4 introduced both reserve requirements and bal-
ance sheets.
a. If the reserve ratio is 10% and a member bank that can 
place funds on deposit at the Federal Reserve has the bal-
ance sheet below, does this bank have excess reserves? 
If the deposit rate is 0.5% and the federal funds rate 
is 0.4%, what is the profit-maximizing choice for the 
overnight placement of excess reserves for the member 
bank?
Bank
Assets
Liablities
Currency 60
Deposits at Fed 50
Loans 600
Bonds 290
Checkable  
deposits 1000
504 
Back to Policy 
Extensions


=== PAGE 285 ===
b. If the reserve ratio is 10% and a member bank that can 
place funds on deposit at the Federal Reserve has the bal-
ance sheet below, does this bank have excess reserves? If 
the discount rate is 0.75% and the federal funds rate is 
0.8%, how should the profit-maximizing member bank 
borrow overnight to meet reserve requirements?
Banks
Assets
Liablities
Currency 30
Deposits at Fed 50
Loans 600
Bonds 320
Checkable 
deposits 1000
c. If all banks in America were member banks, explain why 
the Federal Reserve could be certain that the federal funds 
rate fell between the deposit rate and the discount rate?
d. In Figure 22-3, the federal funds rate falls slightly below the 
deposit rate. Explain, using the balance sheet below for a 
non-member bank, how this would happen. Non-member 
banks hold part of their required reserves as deposits at 
member banks.
Non-member bank
Assets
Liablities
Currency 50
Deposits at  
member bank 20
Loans 330
Bonds 100
Checkable 
deposits 500
DIG DEEPER
8. Taxes, inflation, and home ownership
In this chapter, we discussed the effect of inflation on the 
effective capital-gains tax rate on the sale of a home. In this ques-
tion, we explore the effect of inflation on another feature of the tax 
code—the deductibility of mortgage interest.
Suppose you have a mortgage of $50,000. Expected inflation 
is pe, and the nominal interest rate on your mortgage is i. Consider 
two cases:
i. pe = 0%; i = 4%
ii. pe = 10%; i = 14%
a. What is the real interest rate you are paying on your mort-
gage in each case?
b. Suppose you can deduct nominal mortgage interest pay-
ments from your income before paying income tax. Assume 
that the tax rate is 25%. So, for each dollar you pay in 
mortgage interest, you pay 25 cents less in taxes, in effect 
getting a subsidy from the government for your mortgage 
costs. Compute, in each case, the real interest rate you are 
paying on your mortgage, taking this subsidy into account.
c. Considering only the deductibility of mortgage inter-
est (and not capital-gains taxation), is inflation good for 
homeowners
9. Suppose you have been elected to Congress. One day, one of your 
colleagues makes the following statement:
The Fed chair is the most powerful economic policy maker in 
the United States. We should not turn over the keys to the 
economy to someone who was not elected and therefore has no 
accountability. Congress should impose an explicit Taylor rule 
on the Fed. Congress should choose not only the target infla-
tion rate but the relative weight on the inflation and unem-
ployment targets. Why should the preferences of an individual 
substitute for the will of the people, as expressed through the 
democratic and legislative processes?
Do you agree with your colleague? Discuss the advantages 
and disadvantages of imposing an explicit Taylor rule on the 
Fed.
EXPLORE FURTHER
10. The frequency of the zero lower bound around the world
Use the FRED database at the Federal Reserve Bank of  
St. Louis to find the monthly average nominal policy interest rates for 
four major central banks. The series for these rates are: United States, 
federal funds (FEDFUNDS); United Kingdom, (INTDSRGBM193N); 
European Central Bank (covering the Euro-zone countries including Italy, 
France, and Germany), immediate rate on Euro (IRSTCI01EZM156N); 
Bank of Japan, immediate rate on yen (IRSTCI01JPM156N); Bank of 
Canada, immediate rate (IRSTCB01CAM156N).
Which of these central banks has spent a significant 
period of time at the zero lower bound since 2000?
11. Current monetary policy
Problem 10 in Chapter 4 asked you to consider the current 
stance of monetary policy. Here, you are asked to do so again, but 
with the additional understanding of monetary policy you have 
gained in this and previous chapters.
Go to the Web site of  the Federal Reserve Board of  Governors 
(www.federalreserve.gov) and download either the press release 
you considered in Chapter 4 (if  you did Problem 10) or the 
most recent press release of  the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC).
a. What is the stance of monetary policy as described in the 
press release?
b. Is there evidence that the FOMC considers both inflation 
and unemployment when setting interest rate policy as 
would be implied by the Taylor rule?
c. Does the language make specific reference to a target for 
inflation?
d. Does the language make specific reference to the natural or 
target real rate of interest?
e. Does the language raise any issues related to macropru-
dential regulation of financial institutions?
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
505


=== PAGE 286 ===
FURTHER READINGS
 
■For an early statement of inflation targeting, read 
“Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary 
Policy?” by Ben Bernanke and Frederic Mishkin, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 1997, Vol. 11 (Spring): pp. 97–116. 
(This article was written by Ben Bernanke before he became 
Chairman of the Fed.)
 
■For more institutional details on how the Fed actually func-
tions, see www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/default.
htm.
 
■A time frame giving financial developments and the actions 
of the Fed from 2008 to 2011 is given at www.nytimes.com/
interactive/2008/09/27/business/economy/20080927_
WEEKS_TIMELINE.html.
 
■A great long read: The description of the problems in the 
financial sector and of US monetary policy during the crisis 
by the Fed Chair himself, in The Courage to Act: A Memoir of 
a Crisis and Its Aftermath by Ben Bernanke, W. W. Norton & 
Co., Inc., 2015.
506 
Back to Policy 
Extensions


=== PAGE 287 ===
461
Fiscal Policy:  
A Summing Up
T
he financial crisis and the Great Recession led to large budget deficits, and these 
have resulted in a large increase in debt-to-GDP ratios. The debt-to-GDP ratio, 
which stood at 73% in advanced countries in 2007, was 104% in 2018. In some 
countries, it was much higher: 130% in Italy, 188% in Greece, 240% in Japan. 
A major macroeconomic question confronting governments is whether these ratios should 
be reduced and, if so, at what speed.
The purpose of this chapter is to review what we have learned about fiscal policy so 
far, to explore in more depth the dynamics of deficits and debt, to discuss the costs of high 
debt, and to give a tentative answer to the question in the opening paragraph.
Section 22-1 takes stock of what we have learned about fiscal policy so far.
Section 22-2 looks more closely at the government budget constraint and examines its 
implications for the relation between budget deficits, the interest rate, the growth rate, 
and government debt.
Section 22-3 takes up three issues for which the government budget constraint plays 
a central role, from the proposition that deficits do not really matter, to how to run fiscal 
policy in the cycle, to whether to finance wars through taxes or through debt.
Section 22-4 discusses the dangers associated with high government debt, from higher 
taxes to higher interest rates, default, and high inflation.
Section 22-5 looks at the challenges facing US fiscal policy today.
22
If you remember one basic message from this chapter, it should be: Fiscal policy 
can be a strong macroeconomic policy tool. When using it, one must think about 
both its short-, medium-, and long-run effects. 


=== PAGE 288 ===
462 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
22-1  WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED
Let’s review what we have learned so far about fiscal policy:
 
■
In Chapter 3, we looked at how government spending and taxes affected demand 
and, in turn, output in the short run.
We saw that, in the short run, a fiscal expansion—increases in government 
spending or decreases in taxes—increases output.
 
■
In Chapter 5, we looked at the short-run effects of fiscal policy on output and on the 
interest rate.
We saw that a fiscal contraction leads to lower disposable income, which causes 
people to decrease their consumption. This decrease in demand leads, through a 
multiplier, to a decrease in output and income. At a given policy rate, the fiscal 
contraction leads therefore to a decrease in output. A decrease in the policy rate 
by the central bank can, however, potentially offset the adverse effects of the fiscal 
contraction.
 
■
In Chapter 6, we saw how fiscal policy was used during the financial crisis to limit 
the fall in output.
We saw that when the economy is in a liquidity trap, a reduction in the interest 
rate can no longer be used to increase output, and thus fiscal policy has an important 
role to play. Large increases in spending and cuts in taxes, however, were not enough 
to avoid the recession.
 
■
In Chapter 9, we looked at the effects of fiscal policy in the short run and in the 
medium run.
We saw that, in the medium run (that is, taking the capital stock as given), a fis-
cal consolidation has no effect on output but is reflected in a different composition of 
spending. In the short run, however, output decreases. In other words, if output was 
at potential to start with, the fiscal consolidation, as desirable as it may be on other 
grounds, initially leads to a recession.
 
■
In Chapter 11, we looked at how saving, both private and public, affects the level of 
capital accumulation and the level of output in the long run.
We saw that, once capital accumulation is taken into account, a larger budget 
deficit, and by implication a lower national saving rate, decreases capital accumula-
tion, leading to a lower level of output in the long run.
 
■
In Chapter 16, we returned to the short-run effects of fiscal policy, considering not 
only fiscal policy’s direct effects through taxes and government spending, but also its 
effects on expectations.
We saw that the effects of fiscal policy depend on expectations of future fiscal 
and monetary policy. We saw that a deficit reduction may, in some circumstances, 
lead to an increase in output even in the short run, thanks to people’s expectations 
of higher future disposable income.
 
■
In Chapter 18, we looked at the effects of fiscal policy when the economy is open in 
the goods market.
We saw that fiscal policy affects both output and the trade balance, and we 
examined the relation between the budget deficit and the trade deficit.
 
■
In Chapter 19, we looked at the role of fiscal policy in an economy open in both goods 
markets and financial markets.
We saw that the effects of fiscal policy depend on the exchange rate regime. 
Fiscal policy is likely to have a stronger effect on output under fixed exchange rates 
than under flexible exchange rates.
 
■
In Chapter 21, we looked at the problems facing policymakers in general, from 
uncertainty about the effects of policy to issues of time consistency and credibility. 


=== PAGE 289 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
463
We looked at the pros and cons of putting restraints on the conduct of fiscal policy, 
from spending caps to a constitutional amendment to balance the budget.
In deriving these conclusions, we did not pay close attention to the government bud-
get constraint—that is, the relation among debt, deficits, spending, and taxes over time. 
This relation is important, however, in understanding both how we got to where we are 
today and the choices faced by policymakers. It is the focus of the next section.
22-2 THE GOVERNMENT BUDGET CONSTRAINT: 
DEFICITS, DEBT, SPENDING, AND TAXES
Suppose that, starting from a balanced budget, the government decreases taxes, creating 
a budget deficit. What will happen to the debt over time? Will the government need to 
increase taxes later? If so, by how much?
The Arithmetic of Deficits and Debt
To answer these questions, we must begin with a definition of the budget deficit. We can 
write the budget deficit in year t as:
 
deficitt = rBt - 1 + Gt - Tt 
(22.1)
All variables are in real terms:
 
■
Bt - 1 is government debt at the end of year t - 1, or, equivalently, at the beginning 
of year t; r is the real interest rate, which we shall for now assume to be constant. 
Thus, rBt - 1 equals the real interest payments on the government debt in year t.
 
■
Gt is government spending on goods and services during year t.
 
■
Tt is taxes minus transfers during year t.
In words: The budget deficit equals spending, including interest payments on the 
debt, minus taxes net of transfers.
Note two characteristics of equation (22.1):
 
■
We measure interest payments as real interest payments—that is, the product of the 
real interest rate times existing debt—rather than as actual interest payments—that 
is, the product of the nominal interest rate and the existing debt. As the Focus Box 
“Inflation Accounting and the Measurement of Deficits” shows, this is the correct 
way of measuring interest payments. Official measures of the deficit, however, use 
actual (nominal) interest payments and are therefore incorrect. When inflation is 
high, official measures can be seriously misleading. The correct measure of the defi-
cit is sometimes called the inflation-adjusted deficit.
 
■
For consistency with our definition of G as spending on goods and services, G does not 
include transfer payments. Transfers are instead subtracted from T, so that T stands for 
taxes minus transfers. Official measures of government spending typically add transfers to 
spending on goods and services and define revenues as taxes, not taxes net of transfers.
 
■
These are only accounting conventions. Whether transfers are added to spending or 
subtracted from taxes makes a difference to the measurement of G and T, but clearly 
does not affect G - T, and therefore does not affect the measure of the deficit.
The government budget constraint then simply states that the change in govern-
ment debt during year t is equal to the deficit during year t:
Bt - Bt - 1 = deficitt
Do not confuse the words 
deficit and debt. (Many jour-
nalists and politicians do.) 
Debt is a stock—what the 
government owes as a result 
of past deficits. The deficit 
is a flow—how much the 
government borrows during a 
given year.
b
Transfer payments are gov-
ernment transfers to individu-
als, such as unemployment 
benefits or Medicare.
b
Let G represent government 
spending on goods and ser-
vices; Tr, transfers; and Tax, 
total taxes. For simplicity, 
assume interest payments rB 
equal zero. Then
Deficit = G + Tr - Tax
This can be rewritten in two 
(equivalent) ways:
Deficit = G - 1Tax - Tr2
The deficit equals spending 
on goods and services minus 
net taxes—that is, taxes 
minus transfers. This is the 
way we write it in the text. Or 
it can be written as:
Deficit = 1G + Tr2 - Tax
which is the way it is decom-
posed in official measures 
(see, for example, Table A1-4 
in Appendix 1 at the end of 
the book).
b


=== PAGE 290 ===
464 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
Inflation Accounting and the Measurement of Deficits
Official measures of the budget deficit are constructed (drop-
ping the time indexes, which are not needed here) as nominal 
interest payments, iB, plus spending on goods and services, 
G, minus taxes net of transfers, T:
official measure of the deficit = iB + G - T
This is an accurate measure of the cash flow position of 
the government. If it is positive, the government is spending 
more than it receives and must therefore issue new debt. If 
it is negative, the government buys back previously issued 
debt.
But this is not an accurate measure of the change in 
real debt—that is, the change in how much the government 
owes, expressed in terms of goods rather than dollars.
To see why, consider the following example: Suppose the 
official measure of the deficit is equal to zero, so the govern-
ment neither issues nor buys back debt. Suppose inflation is 
positive and equal to 10%. Then, at the end of the year, the 
real value of the debt has decreased by 10%. If we define—as 
we should—the deficit as the change in the real value of gov-
ernment debt, the government has decreased its real debt by 
10% over the year. In other words, it has in fact run a budget 
surplus equal to 10% times the initial level of debt.
More generally: If B is debt and p is inflation, the official 
measure of the deficit overstates the correct measure by an 
amount equal to pB. Put another way, the correct measure 
of the deficit is obtained by subtracting pB from the official 
measure:
correct measure of the deficit = iB + G - T - pB
= 1i - p2B + G - T
= rB + G - T
where r = i - p is the (realized) real interest rate. The cor-
rect measure of the deficit is equal to real interest payments 
plus government spending minus taxes net of transfers.
The difference between the official and the correct 
measures of the deficit equals pB. The higher the rate of 
inflation, p, or the higher the level of debt, B, the more 
inaccurate the official measure. In countries where both 
inflation and debt are high, the official measure may record 
a very large budget deficit, when in fact real government 
debt is decreasing. This is why you should always do the 
inflation adjustment before deriving conclusions about the 
position of fiscal policy.
Figure 1 plots the official measure and the inflation-
adjusted measure of the (federal) budget deficit for the United 
States as a percent of GDP since 1969. The official mea-
sure shows a deficit in every year from 1970 to 1997. The 
inflation-adjusted measure shows instead alternating deficits 
and surpluses until the late 1970s. Both measures, however, 
show that the deficit became much larger after 1980, that 
things improved in the 1990s, and that they have deterio-
rated in the 2000s. Today, with inflation running at about 
2% a year and the ratio of debt-to-GDP around 80%, the 
difference between the two measures is roughly equal to 2% 
times 80%, or 1.6% of GDP.
FOCUS
24
22
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
1969
1974
1979
1984
1989
1994
1999
2004
2009
2014
2019
Percent of GDP
Official Deficit
Inflation-Adjusted Deficit
Figure 1
Official and Inflation-Adjusted Federal Budget Deficits for the United States since 1969
Source: FRED: CPIAUCSL, and Tables B-18 and B-19 Economic Report of the President.


=== PAGE 291 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
465
If the government runs a deficit, government debt increases as the government borrows to 
fund the part of spending in excess of revenues. If the government runs a surplus, government 
debt decreases as the government uses the budget surplus to repay part of its outstanding debt.
Using the definition of the deficit (equation (22.1)), we can rewrite the government 
budget constraint as
 
Bt - Bt - 1 = rBt - 1 + Gt - Tt 
(22.2)
The government budget constraint links the change in government debt to the initial 
level of debt (which affects interest payments) and to current government spending and 
taxes. It is often convenient to decompose the deficit into the sum of two terms:
 
■
Interest payments on the debt, rBt - 1.
 
■
The difference between spending and taxes, Gt - Tt. This term is called the primary 
deficit (equivalently, Tt - Gt is called the primary surplus).
Using this decomposition, we can rewrite equation (22.2) as
Change in the Debt 
Interest Payments 
Primary Deficit
Bt - Bt - 1  =     rBt - 1    +     1Gt - Tt2
Or, moving Bt - 1 to the right side of the equation and reorganizing,
Primary Deficit
 
Bt = 11 + r2Bt - 1 +  1Gt - Tt2 
(22.3)
This relation states that the debt at the end of year t equals 11 + r2 times the debt at 
the end of year t - 1 plus the primary deficit during year t, (Gt - Tt). Let’s look at some 
of its implications. (In this section, I shall assume that the real interest rate is positive, so 
that, if the primary deficit is equal to zero, debt increases over time. This is not necessarily 
the case, and I shall return to the assumption later on.)
Current versus Future Taxes
Consider first a one-year decrease in taxes for the path of debt and future taxes. Start 
from a situation where, until year 1, the government has balanced its budget, so that 
initial debt is equal to zero. During year 1, the government decreases taxes by 1 (think 1 
billion dollars, for example) for one year. Thus, debt at the end of year 1, B1, is equal to 1. 
The question we take up: What happens thereafter?
Full Repayment in Year 2
Suppose the government decides to fully repay the debt during year 2. From 
equation (22.3), the budget constraint for year 2 is given by
B2 = 11 + r2B1 + 1G2 - T22
If the debt is fully repaid during year 2, then the debt at the end of year 2 is equal to 
zero, B2 = 0. Replacing B1 by 1 and B2 by 0 and transposing terms gives
T2 - G2 = 11 + r21 = 11 + r2
To repay the debt fully during year 2, the government must run a primary surplus 
equal to 11 + r2. It can do so in one of two ways: a decrease in spending or an increase 
in taxes. I shall assume here and in the rest of this section that the adjustment comes 
through taxes, so that the path of spending is unaffected. It follows that the decrease in 
taxes by 1 during year 1 must be offset by an increase in taxes by 11 + r2 during year 2.
v
V
v
v
Full repayment in year 2:
T1 decreases by 1 1
T2 increases by 11 + r2
b


=== PAGE 292 ===
466 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
The path of taxes and debt corresponding to this case is given in Figure 22-1(a): 
If the debt is fully repaid during year 2, the decrease in taxes of 1 in year 1 requires an 
increase in taxes equal to 11 + r2 in year 2.
Full Repayment in Year t
Now suppose the government decides to wait until year t to repay the debt. From year 2 to 
year t - 1 the primary deficit is equal to zero; taxes are equal to spending, not including 
interest payments on the debt.
During year 2, the primary deficit is zero. So, from equation (22.3), debt at the end 
of year 2 is:
B2 = 11 + r2B1 + 0 = 11 + r21 = 11 + r2
where the second equality uses the fact that B1 = 1.
With the primary deficit still equal to zero during year 3, debt at the end of year 3 is
B3 = 11 + r2B2 + 0 = 11 + r211 + r21 = 11 + r22
Solving for debt at the end of year 4 and so on, it is clear that as long as the government 
keeps a primary deficit equal to zero, debt grows at a rate equal to the interest rate, and thus 
debt at the end of year t - 1 is given by
 
Bt - 1 = 11 + r2t - 2 
(22.4)
Even though taxes are cut only in year 1, debt keeps increasing over time, at a rate 
equal to the interest rate. The reason is simple; although the primary deficit is equal to 
zero, debt is now positive, and so are interest payments on it. Each year, the government 
must issue more debt to pay the interest on existing debt.
In year t, the year in which the government decides to repay the debt, the budget 
constraint is
Bt = 11 + r2Bt - 1 + 1Gt - Tt2
(b) Debt Reimbursement in Year 5
Year
Taxes
End-of-year 
     debt
0
0
1
21
2
0
3
0
4
0
5
(11r)4
0
1
(11r)
(11r)2
(11r)3
0
(a) Debt Reimbursement in Year 2
Year
Taxes
End-of-year 
     debt
0
0
1
21
2
(11r)
3
0
4
0
5
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
(c) Debt Stabilization in Year 2
Year
Taxes
End-of-year 
    debt
0
0
1
21
2
r
3
r
4
r
5
r
0
1
1
1
1
1
Figure 22-1
Tax Cuts, Debt 
Repayment, and Debt 
Stabilization
(a) If the debt is fully repaid 
during year 2, the decrease 
in taxes of 1 in year 1 
requires an increase in taxes 
equal to 11 + r2 in year 2. 
(b) If the debt is fully repaid 
during year 5, the decrease 
in taxes of 1 in year 1 
requires an increase in taxes 
equal to 11 + r24 during year 
5. (c) If the debt is stabilized 
from year 2 on, then taxes 
must be permanently higher 
by r from year 2 on.


=== PAGE 293 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
467
If debt is fully repaid during year t, then Bt (debt at the end of year t) is zero. Replacing 
Bt by zero and Bt - 1 by its expression from equation (22.4) gives
0 = 11 + r211 + r2t - 2 + 1Gt - Tt2
Reorganizing and bringing 1Gt - Tt2 to the left side of the equation implies
Tt - Gt = 11 + r2t - 1
To repay the debt, the government must run a primary surplus equal to 11 + r2t - 1 
during year t. If the adjustment is done through taxes, the initial decrease in taxes of 1 
during year 1 leads to an increase in taxes of 11 + r2t - 1 during year t. The path of taxes 
and debt corresponding to the case where debt is repaid in year 5 is given in Figure 22-1(b).
This example yields our first set of conclusions:
 
■
If government spending is unchanged, a decrease in taxes must eventually be offset 
by an increase in taxes in the future.
 
■
The longer the government waits to increase taxes, or the higher the real interest rate 
is, the higher the eventual increase in taxes must be.
Debt Stabilization in Year 2
We have assumed so far that the government fully repays the debt. Let’s now look at what 
happens to taxes if the government only stabilizes the debt. (Stabilizing the debt means 
changing taxes or spending so that debt remains constant from then on.)
Suppose the government decides to stabilize the debt from year 2 on: the debt at the 
end of year 2 and thereafter remains at the same level as at the end of year 1.
From equation (22.3), the budget constraint for year 2 is
B2 = 11 + r2B1 + 1G2 - T22
Under our assumption that debt is stabilized in year 2, B2 = B1 = 1. Setting 
B2 = B1 = 1 in the preceding equation yields
1 = 11 + r2 + 1G2 - T22
Reorganizing and bringing 1G2 - T22 to the left side of the equation,
T2 - G2 = 11 + r2 - 1 = r
To avoid a further increase in debt during year 2, the government must run a pri-
mary surplus equal to real interest payments on the existing debt (recall our assumption 
that the real interest rate is positive). It must do so in each of the following years as well. 
Each year, the primary surplus must be sufficient to cover interest payments, leaving 
the debt level unchanged. The path of taxes and debt is shown in Figure 22-1(c). Debt 
remains equal to 1 from year 1 on. Taxes are permanently higher from year 2 on, by an 
amount equal to r; equivalently, from year 2 on, the government runs a primary surplus 
equal to r.
The logic of this argument extends directly to the case where the government waits 
until year t to stabilize the debt. Whenever the government stabilizes, it must, each year 
from then on, run a primary surplus sufficient to pay the interest on the debt.
This example yields our second set of conclusions:
 
■
The legacy of past deficits is higher government debt today.
 
■
To stabilize the debt, the government must eliminate the deficit.
 
■
To eliminate the deficit, and if the interest rate is positive, the government must run 
a primary surplus equal to the interest payments on the existing debt. This requires 
higher taxes forever.
Add exponents: 11 + r2 
11 + r2t - 2 = 11 + r2t - 1.
See Appendix 2 at the end of 
this book.
b
Fu ll repayment in year 5:  
T1 decreases by 1 1   
T5 increases by 11 + r24
b
Stabilizing the debt from  
year 2 on:
T1 decreases by 1 1  
T2, T3,cincrease by r
b


=== PAGE 294 ===
468 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
The Evolution of the Debt-to-GDP Ratio
We have focused so far on the evolution of the level of debt. But in an economy in which 
output grows over time, it makes more sense to focus instead on the ratio of debt to output.
To see how this change in focus modifies our conclusions, we need to go from equa-
tion (22.3) to an equation that gives the evolution of the debt-to-GDP ratio—the debt 
ratio for short.
Deriving the evolution of the debt ratio takes a few steps. Do not worry; the final 
equation is easy to understand.
First divide both sides of equation (22.3) by real output, Yt,  to get
Bt
Yt
= 11 + r2Bt - 1
Yt
+ Gt - Tt
Yt
Next rewrite Bt - 1>Yt  as 1Bt - 1>Yt - 12 1Yt - 1>Yt2  (in other words, multiply the 
numerator and the denominator by Yt - 1):
Bt
Yt
= 11 + r2a Yt - 1
Yt
b Bt - 1
Yt - 1
+ Gt - Tt
Yt
Note that all the terms in the equation are now in terms of ratios to output, Y. To 
simplify this equation, assume that output growth is constant and denote the growth 
rate of output by g, so Yt - 1>Yt  can be written as 1>11 + g2. And use the approximation 
11 + r2>11 + g2 ≈1 + r - g.
Using these two assumptions, rewrite the preceding equation as
Bt
Yt
= 11 + r - g2Bt - 1
Yt - 1
+ Gt - Tt
Yt
Finally, reorganize to get
 
Bt
Yt
- Bt - 1
Yt - 1
= 1r - g2Bt - 1
Yt - 1
+ Gt - Tt
Yt
 
(22.5)
This took many steps, but the final relation has a simple interpretation.
The change in the debt ratio over time (the left side of the equation) is equal to the sum 
of two terms:
 
■
The first term is the difference between the real interest rate and the growth rate, 
times the initial debt ratio.
 
■
The second term is the ratio of the primary deficit to GDP.
Compare equation (22.5), which gives the evolution of the ratio of debt to GDP, to 
equation (22.2), which gives the evolution of the level of debt itself. Assume that the pri-
mary deficit (and therefore the ratio of the primary deficit to GDP is equal to zero. Then, 
whether debt increases or decreases depends on whether the interest rate is positive or 
not. However, whether the debt-to-GDP ratio increases or decreases depends on whether 
the interest rate is larger or smaller than the growth rate. (More on this in Section 22-5.)
Equation (22.5) implies that the increase in the ratio of debt to GDP will be larger:
 
■
the higher the real interest rate,
 
■
the lower the growth rate of output,
 
■
the higher the initial debt ratio,
 
■
the higher the ratio of the primary deficit to GDP.
Start from Yt = 11 + g2Yt - 1. 
Divide both sides by Yt to 
get 1 = 11 + g2Yt - 1>Yt. 
Reorganize to get 
Yt - 1>Yt = 1>11 + g2.
This approximation is derived 
as proposition 6 in Appen-
dix 2 at the end of this book.
c
If two variables (here debt 
and GDP) grow at rates r 
and g respectively, then their 
ratio (here the ratio of debt 
to GDP) will grow at rate 
r - g. See proposition 8 in 
Appendix 2  at the end of 
this book.
c


=== PAGE 295 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
469
Building on this relation, the Focus Box “How Countries Decreased Their Debt Ratios 
after World War II” shows how governments that inherited high debt ratios at the end of 
the war steadily decreased them through a combination of low real interest rates, high 
growth rates, and primary surpluses. The next section shows how our analysis can also 
be used to shed light on a number of other fiscal policy issues.
How Countries Decreased Their Debt Ratios after 
World War II
After World War II, many countries had high debt ratios, 
often in excess of 100% of GDP. Yet, two or three decades 
later, the debt ratios were much lower, often below 50%. 
(We saw in Chapter 21 that this was the case for the United 
States.) How did they do it? The answer is given in Table 1.
Table 1 looks at four countries: Australia, Canada, New 
Zealand, and the United Kingdom. Column 1 gives the period 
during which debt ratios decreased. The first year is either 
1945 or 1946. The last year is the year in which the debt 
ratio reached its lowest point; the period of adjustment varies 
from 13 years in Canada to 30 years in the United Kingdom. 
Column 2 gives debt ratios at the start and at the end of the 
period. The most striking numbers are those for the United 
Kingdom: an initial debt ratio of 270% of GDP in 1946 and 
an impressive decline to 47% in 1974.
To interpret the numbers in the table, go back to equa-
tion (22.5). It tells us that there are two, not mutually exclu-
sive, ways in which a country can reduce its debt ratio. The first 
is through high primary surpluses. Suppose, for example, that 
1r - g2 was equal to 0. Then the decrease in the debt ratio over 
some period would just be the sum of the ratios of primary sur-
pluses to GDP over the period. The second is through a low 1r - g2, 
through either low real interest rates or high growth, or both.
With this in mind, columns 3 to 5 give the average ratio 
of the primary balance to GDP, average growth rate of GDP, 
and average real interest rate over the relevant period.
Look first at primary balances in column 3. All four coun-
tries ran primary surpluses on average over the period. But 
note that these primary surpluses account only for a small 
part of the decline in the debt ratio. Look, for example, at the 
United Kingdom. The sum of the ratios of the primary sur-
pluses to GDP over the period is equal to 2.1% multiplied by 
30 = 63% of GDP, accounting for less than a third of the 
decline in the debt ratio, 223% 1270% - 47%2 of GDP.
Now look at the growth rates and real interest rates in 
columns 4 and 5. Note how high growth rates and how low 
real interest rates were during the period. Take Australia, for 
example. The average value of 1r - g2 during the period 
was -6.9% 1-2.3% - 4.6%2. This implies that, even if the 
primary balance had been equal to zero, the debt ratio would 
have declined each year by 6.9%. In other words, the decline 
in debt was mainly the result not of primary surpluses but 
of sustained high growth and sustained negative real inter-
est rates.
This leads to a final question: Why were real interest 
rates so low? The answer is given in column 6. During the 
period, average inflation was relatively high. This inflation, 
combined with consistently low nominal interest rates, 
is what accounts for the negative real interest rates. Put 
another way, a large part of the decrease in debt ratios was 
achieved by paying bond holders a negative real return on 
their bonds for many years.
FOCUS
1
2
3
4
5
6
Country
Start/End 
Year
Start/End 
Debt Ratio
Primary 
Balance
Growth 
Rate
Real Interest 
Rate
Inflation 
Rate
Australia
1946–1963
92–29
1.1
4.6
- 2.3
5.7
Canada
1945–1957
115–59
3.6
4.3
- 1.4
4.0
New Zealand
1946–1974
148–41
2.3
3.9
- 2.9
4.9
United Kingdom
1946–1975
270–47
2.1
2.6
- 1.5
5.5
Columns 2 and 3: Percent of GDP. Columns 4 to 6: Percent.
Source: S. M. A. Abbas et al., “Historical Patterns and Dynamics of Public Debt: Evidence from a New Database,” IMF Economic Review, 
2011 (November): pp. 717–742.
Table 1 
Changes in Debt Ratios Following World War II


=== PAGE 296 ===
470 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
22-3 RICARDIAN EQUIVALENCE, CYCLICAL 
ADJUSTED DEFICITS, AND WAR FINANCE
Having looked at the mechanics of the government budget constraint, we take up three 
issues in which this constraint plays a central role.
Ricardian Equivalence
How does taking into account the government budget constraint affect the way we 
should think of the effects of deficits on output?
One extreme view is that once the government budget constraint is taken into 
account, neither deficits nor debt have an effect on economic activity! This argument 
is known as the Ricardian equivalence proposition. David Ricardo, a 19th-century 
English economist, was the first to articulate its logic. His argument was further devel-
oped and given prominence in the 1970s by Robert Barro, then at Chicago, now at 
Harvard University. For this reason, the argument is also known as the Ricardo-Barro 
proposition.
The best way to understand the logic of the proposition is to use the example of tax 
changes from Section 22-2:
 
■
Suppose that the government decreases taxes by 1 (again, think 1 billion dollars) this 
year and announces that, to repay the debt, it will increase taxes by 11 + r2 next 
year. What will be the effect of the initial tax cut on consumption?
 
■
One possible answer is: No effect at all. Why? Because consumers realize that the tax 
cut is not much of a gift. Lower taxes this year are exactly offset, in present value, by 
higher taxes next year. Put another way, their human wealth —the present value of 
after-tax labor income—is unaffected. Current taxes go down by 1, but the present 
value of next year’s taxes goes up by 11 + r2>11 + r2 = 1, and the net effect of the 
two changes is exactly equal to zero.
 
■
Another way of coming to the same answer—this time looking at saving rather 
than consumption—is as follows: To say that consumers do not change their con-
sumption in response to the tax cut is the same as saying that private saving increases 
one-for-one with the deficit. The Ricardian equivalence proposition says that if 
a government finances a given path of spending through deficits, private saving 
will increase one-for-one with the decrease in public saving, leaving total saving 
unchanged. The total amount left for investment will not be affected. Over time, the 
mechanics of the government budget constraint imply that government debt will 
increase. But this increase will not come at the expense of capital accumulation.
Under the Ricardian equivalence proposition, a long sequence of deficits and the 
associated increase in government debt are no cause for worry. As the government is dis-
saving, the argument goes, people are saving more in anticipation of the higher taxes to 
come. The decrease in public saving is offset by an equal increase in private saving. Total 
saving is therefore unaffected, and so is investment. The economy has the same capital 
stock today that it would have had if there had been no increase in debt. Therefore, high 
debt is no cause for concern.
How seriously should we take the Ricardian equivalence proposition? Most econo-
mists would answer: “Seriously, but surely not seriously enough to think that deficits 
and debt are irrelevant.” A major theme of this book has been that expectations mat-
ter, that consumption decisions depend not only on current income but also on future 
income. If it were widely believed that a tax cut this year will be followed by an offset-
ting increase in taxes next year, the effect on consumption would indeed probably be 
Although Ricardo stated the 
logic of the argument, he also 
argued that there were many 
reasons why it would not 
hold in practice. In contrast, 
Barro argued that the argu-
ment was not only logically 
correct but also a good 
description of reality.
c
See Chapter 15 for a defini-
tion of human wealth and 
a discussion of its role in 
consumption.
c
Go back to the IS-LM model. 
If Ricardian equivalence 
holds, what is the multiplier 
associated with a decrease in 
current taxes?
c


=== PAGE 297 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
471
small. Many consumers would save most or all of the tax cut in anticipation of higher 
taxes next year. (Replace year by month or week and the argument becomes even more 
convincing.)
Of course, tax cuts rarely come with the announcement of corresponding tax 
increases a year later. Consumers must guess when and how taxes will eventually be 
increased. This fact does not by itself invalidate the Ricardian equivalence argument. No 
matter when taxes will be increased, the government budget constraint still implies that 
the present value of future tax increases must always be equal to the decrease in taxes 
today.
Take the second example we looked at in Section 22-2, drawn in 
Figure 22-1(b) in which the government waits t years to increase taxes and so increases 
taxes by 11 + r2t - 1. The present value in year 0 of this expected tax increase is 
11 + r2t - 1>11 + r2t - 1 = 1—exactly equal to the original tax cut. The change in 
human wealth from the tax cut is still zero.
But insofar as future tax increases appear more distant and their timing more uncer-
tain, consumers are in fact more likely to ignore them. This may be because they expect 
to die before taxes go up or, more likely, because they just do not think that far into the 
future. In either case, Ricardian equivalence is likely to fail.
So it is safe to conclude that budget deficits have an important effect on activity, 
although perhaps a smaller effect than you thought before going through the Ricardian 
equivalence argument. In the short run, larger deficits are likely to lead to higher demand 
and higher output. In the long run, higher government debt lowers capital accumulation 
and, as a result, lowers output.
Deficits, Output Stabilization, and the Cyclically Adjusted 
Deficit
The fact that budget deficits do, indeed, have long-run adverse effects on capital accu-
mulation, and in turn adverse effects on output, does not imply that fiscal policy should 
not be used to reduce output fluctuations. Rather, it implies that deficits during reces-
sions should be offset by surpluses during booms, so as not to lead to a steady increase 
in debt.
To help assess whether fiscal policy is on track, economists have constructed deficit 
measures that tell them what the deficit would be, under existing tax and spending rules, 
if output were equal to potential output. Such measures come under many names—
the full-employment deficit, the midcycle deficit, the standardized employment 
deficit, and the structural deficit (the term used by the OECD). I shall use cyclically 
adjusted deficit, the term I find the most intuitive.
Such a measure gives a simple benchmark against which to judge the direction of 
fiscal policy. If the actual deficit is large but the cyclically adjusted deficit is zero, then cur-
rent fiscal policy is consistent with no systematic increase in debt over time. The debt will 
increase as long as output is below the potential level of output; but as output returns to 
potential, the deficit will disappear and the debt will stabilize.
It does not follow that the goal of fiscal policy should be to maintain a cyclically 
adjusted deficit equal to zero at all times. In a recession, the government may want to 
run a deficit large enough that even the cyclically adjusted deficit is positive. In this case, 
the fact that the cyclically adjusted deficit is positive provides a useful warning: that the 
return of output to potential will not be enough to stabilize the debt. The government will 
have to take specific measures, from tax increases to cuts in spending, to decrease the 
deficit at some point in the future.
The theory underlying the concept of the cyclically adjusted deficit is simple. The 
practice of it has proven tricky. To see why, we need to look at how measures of the 
Recall that this assumes 
that government spending is 
unchanged. If people expect 
government spending to be 
decreased in the future, what 
will they do?
b
The increase in taxes in t 
years is 11 + r2t - 1. The 
discount factor for a dol-
lar t years from now is 
1>11 + r2t - 1. So the value 
of the increase in taxes t 
years from now as of today is 
11 + r2t - 1>11 + r2t - 1 = 1.
b
Note the analogy with mon-
etary policy: The fact that 
higher money growth leads in 
the long run to more inflation 
does not imply that monetary 
policy should not be used for 
output stabilization.
b


=== PAGE 298 ===
472 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
cyclically adjusted deficit are constructed. Construction requires two steps: First, estab-
lish how much lower the deficit would be if output were, say, 1% higher. Second, assess 
how far output is from potential.
 
■
The first step is relatively straightforward. For the United States, a reliable rule of 
thumb is that a 1% decrease in output leads automatically to an increase in the defi-
cit of about 0.5% of GDP. This increase occurs because most taxes are proportional 
to output, whereas most government spending does not depend on the level of out-
put. That means a decrease in output, which leads to a decrease in revenues and not 
much change in spending, naturally leads to a larger deficit.
If output is, say, 5% below potential, the deficit as a ratio to GDP will be about 
2.5% larger than if output were at potential. (This effect of activity on the deficit has 
been called an automatic stabilizer. A recession naturally generates a deficit, and 
therefore a fiscal expansion, which partly counteracts the recession.)
 
■
The second step is more difficult. Recall from Chapter 7 that potential output is the 
output level that would be produced if the economy were operating at the natural 
rate of unemployment. Too low an estimate of the natural rate of unemployment 
will lead to too high an estimate of potential output and therefore too optimistic a 
measure of the cyclically adjusted deficit.
This difficulty explains in part what happened to debt in Europe in the 1980s. 
Based on the assumption of an unchanged natural unemployment rate, the cyclically 
adjusted deficits of the 1980s did not look that bad. If European unemployment had 
returned to its level of the 1970s, the associated increase in output would have been 
enough to reestablish budget balance in most countries. But it turned out that much 
of the increase in unemployment reflected an increase in the natural unemployment 
rate, and unemployment remained high during the 1980s. As a result, the decade 
was characterized by high deficits and large increases in debt ratios in most European 
countries.
Wars and Deficits
Wars typically bring about large budget deficits. As we saw in Chapter 21, the two largest 
increases in US government debt in the 20th century took place during World War I and 
World War II. We examine the case of World War II further in the Focus Box “Deficits, 
Consumption, and Investment in the United States during World War II.”
Is it right for governments to rely so much on deficits to finance wars? After all, war 
economies are usually operating at low unemployment, so output stabilization reasons 
for running deficits are irrelevant. The answer, nevertheless, is yes. In fact, there are two 
good reasons to run deficits during wars:
 
■
The first is distributional: Deficit finance is a way to pass some of the burden of the 
war to those alive after the war. It seems only fair for future generations to share in 
the sacrifices the war requires.
 
■
The second is more narrowly economic: Deficit spending helps reduce tax distortions. 
Let’s look at each reason in turn.
Passing on The Burden of the War
Wars lead to large increases in government spending. Consider the implications of 
financing this increased spending through either increased taxes or debt finance. To dis-
tinguish this case from our previous discussion of output stabilization, let’s also assume 
that output is and remains at its potential level.
Look at the two peaks asso-
ciated with World War I and 
World War II in Figure 21–4.
c


=== PAGE 299 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
473
■ 
Suppose that the government relies on deficit finance. With government spending 
sharply up, there will be a large increase in the demand for goods. Given our assump-
tion that output stays the same, the interest rate will have to increase enough to main-
tain equilibrium. Investment, which depends on the interest rate, will decrease sharply. 
(More realistically, in a war economy, the government may use direct measures to 
decrease non–war-related investment, without resorting to a high interest rate.)
■ 
Suppose instead that the government finances the spending increase through an 
increase in taxes—say, income taxes. Consumption will decline sharply. Exactly how 
much depends on consumers’ expectations: The longer they expect the war to last, the 
longer they will expect higher taxes to last, and the more they will decrease their con-
sumption. In any case, the increase in government spending will be partly offset by 
a decrease in consumption. Interest rates will increase by less than they would have 
increased under deficit spending, and investment will therefore decrease by less.
In short, for a given output, the increase in government spending requires either a 
decrease in consumption or a decrease in investment. Whether the government relies on 
tax increases or deficits determines whether consumption or investment does more of the 
adjustment when government spending increases.
How does this affect who bears the burden of the war? The more the government 
relies on deficits, the smaller the decrease in consumption during the war and the larger 
the decrease in investment. Lower investment means a lower capital stock after the war 
and therefore lower output after the war. By reducing capital accumulation, deficits 
become a way of passing some of the burden of the war onto future generations.
Reducing Tax Distortions
There is another argument for running deficits, not only during wars but also, more gen-
erally, in times when government spending is exceptionally high. Think, for example, of 
reconstruction after an earthquake or the costs involved in the reunification of Germany 
in the early 1990s.
Assume that the econ-
omy is closed, so that 
Y = C + I + G. Suppose 
that G goes up, and Y 
remains the same. Then 
C + I must decrease. If taxes 
are not increased, most 
of the decrease will come 
from a decrease in I. If taxes 
are increased, most of the 
decrease will come from a 
decrease in C.
b
Deficits, Consumption, and Investment in the United 
States during World War II
In 1939, the share of US government spending on goods 
and services in GDP was 15%. By 1944, it had increased to 
45%! The increase was due to increased spending on national 
defense, which went from 1% of GDP in 1939 to 36% in 1944.
Faced with such a massive increase in spending, the US 
government reacted with large tax increases. For the first 
time in US history, the individual income tax became a major 
source of revenues: individual income tax revenues, which 
were 1% of GDP in 1939, increased to 8.5% in 1944. But 
the tax increases were still far less than the increase in gov-
ernment expenditures. The increase in federal revenues, from 
7.2% of GDP in 1939 to 22.7% in 1944, was only a little 
more than half the increase in expenditures.
The result was a sequence of large budget deficits. By 1944, 
the federal deficit reached 22% of GDP. The ratio of debt to GDP, 
already high at 53% in 1939 because of the deficits the govern-
ment had run during the Great Depression, reached 110%!
Was the increase in government spending achieved at the 
expense of consumption or private investment? (As we saw in 
Chapter 18, it could in principle have come from higher imports 
and a current account deficit. But the United States had nobody 
to borrow from during the war. Rather, it was lending to some 
of its allies. Loans and gifts from the US government to foreign 
countries were equal to 6% of US GDP in 1944.)
 
■
It was met in large part by a decrease in consumption. 
The share of  consumption in GDP fell by 23 percent-
age points, from 74% to 51%. Part of  the decrease 
in consumption may have been due to anticipations 
of  higher taxes after the war; part of  it was due 
to the unavailability of  many consumer durables. 
Patriotism also probably motivated people to save 
more and buy the war bonds issued by the govern-
ment to finance the war.
 
■
It was also met by a 6% decrease in the share of (private) 
investment in GDP—from 10% to 4%. Part of the bur-
den of the war was therefore passed on, in the form of 
lower capital accumulation, to those living after the war.
FOCUS


=== PAGE 300 ===
474 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
The argument is as follows: If the government were to increase taxes to finance the tem-
porary increase in spending, tax rates would have to be very high. Very high tax rates can 
lead to very high economic distortions. Faced with very high tax rates, people work less or 
engage in illegal, untaxed activities. Rather than moving the tax rate up and down to always 
balance the budget, it is better (from the point of view of reducing distortions) to maintain a 
relatively constant tax rate—to smooth taxes. Tax smoothing implies running large deficits 
when government spending is exceptionally high and small surpluses the rest of the time.
22-4 THE DANGERS OF HIGH DEBT
We have seen that high debt requires higher taxes in the future. A lesson from history 
is that high debt can also lead to vicious cycles, making the conduct of fiscal policy 
extremely difficult. Let’s look at this more closely.
High Debt, Default Risk, and Vicious Cycles
Return to equation (22.5):
Bt
Yt
- Bt - 1
Yt - 1
= 1r - g2Bt - 1
Yt - 1
+ 1Gt - Tt2
Yt
Take a country with a high debt ratio, say, 100%. Suppose the real interest rate is 3% 
and the growth rate is 2%. The first term on the right is 13% - 2%2 times 100% = 1% 
of GDP. Suppose further that the government is running a primary surplus of 1% of out-
put, so just enough to keep the debt ratio constant (the right side of the equation equals 
13% - 2%2 * 100% + 1-1%2 = 0%).
Now suppose financial investors start to worry that the government may not 
be able to fully repay the debt. They ask for a higher interest rate to compensate for 
what they perceive as a higher risk of default on the debt. This makes it more difficult 
for the government to stabilize the debt. Suppose, for example, that the interest rate 
increases from 3% to 8%. Then, just to stabilize the debt, the government needs to 
run a primary surplus of 6% of output (the right side of the equation is then equal to 
18% - 2%2 * 100% + 1-6%2 = 0).
Suppose that, in response to the increase in the interest rate, the government takes 
measures to increase the primary surplus to 6% of output. The spending cuts or tax 
increases that are needed are likely to prove politically costly, potentially generating more 
political uncertainty, a higher risk of default, and thus a further increase in the inter-
est rate. Also, the sharp fiscal contraction is likely to lead to a recession, decreasing the 
growth rate. Both the increase in the real interest rate and the decrease in growth further 
increase 1r - g2, requiring an even larger budget surplus to stabilize the debt. At some 
point, the government may become unable to increase the primary surplus sufficiently, 
and the debt ratio starts increasing, leading investors to become even more worried and 
to require an even higher interest rate. Increases in the interest rate and increases in 
the debt ratio feed on each other. In short, the higher the ratio of debt to GDP, the larger 
the potential for catastrophic debt dynamics. Even if the fear that the government may 
not fully repay the debt was initially unfounded, it can easily become self-fulfilling. The 
higher interest that the government must pay on its debt can lead the government to lose 
control of its budget and lead to an increase in debt to a level such that the government is 
unable to repay the debt, thus validating the initial fears.
This should remind you of 
bank runs and the discus-
sion in Chapter 6. If people 
believe a bank is not solvent 
and decide to withdraw their 
funds, the bank may have 
to sell its assets at fire sale 
prices and become insolvent, 
validating the initial fears. 
Here, investors do not ask 
for their funds, but require a 
higher interest rate. The result 
is the same. c


=== PAGE 301 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
475
This is far from an abstract issue. Let’s look again at what happened in the euro 
area during the crisis. Figure 22-2 shows the evolution of interest rates on Italian and 
Spanish government bonds from March to December 2012. For each country, it plots 
the difference, also called the spread, between the two-year interest rate on the coun-
try’s government bonds and the two-year interest rate on German government bonds. 
The reason for comparing interest rates to German interest rates is that German bonds 
are considered nearly riskless. The spreads are measured, on the vertical axis, in basis 
points (a basis point is a hundredth of a percent).
Both spreads started rising in March 2012. Toward the end of July, the spread on 
Italian bonds reached 500 basis points (equivalently, 5%), and the spread on Spanish 
bonds, 660 basis points (6.6%). These spreads reflected two worries: first, that the Italian 
and Spanish governments might default on their debt, and second, that they might 
devalue. In principle, in a monetary union, such as the euro area, no one should expect a 
devaluation unless markets start thinking that the monetary union might break up and 
that countries might reintroduce national currencies at a devalued exchange rate. This is 
exactly what investors worried about in the spring and summer of 2012. We can under-
stand why by going back to our discussion of self-fulfilling debt crises.
Consider Italy, for instance. In March, the interest on Italian two-year bonds was 
below 3%; this was the sum of the interest on German two-year bonds, slightly below 
1%, plus a 2% risk spread due to investors’ concerns about the Italian government’s 
creditworthiness. The country had at the time (and still has) a debt-to-GDP ratio 
above 130%. With interest below 3% such a high debt burden was sustainable; Italy 
was generating primary budget surpluses sufficient to keep the debt stable, although 
at that high level. Italy was fragile (because the debt was so high) but in a “good equi-
librium.” At this point investors started asking themselves what would happen if, for 
some reason, interest rates on Italian bonds were to double, to 6%. They concluded 
that if that happened, it was unlikely that Italy would be able to raise its primary sur-
plus high enough to keep the debt stable. It was more likely that the country would 
enter a debt spiral and end up defaulting. At that point Italy might decide to aban-
don the monetary union and rely on a devaluation to improve its competitiveness and 
Go back to Section 20-2 for 
a discussion of how, under 
fixed exchange rates, the 
expectation of a devaluation 
leads to high interest rates. 
The same is true for a coun-
try in a common currency 
area.
b
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Mar-12
Jun-12
Sep-12
Time
Dec-12
Italy
Yield spread over German bonds (basis points)
Spain
Figure 22-2
The Increase in European 
Bond Spreads
The spreads on Italian and 
Spanish two-year govern-
ment bonds over German 
two-year bonds increased 
sharply between March and 
July 2012. At the end of July, 
when the European Central 
Bank stated that it would 
do whatever was necessary 
to prevent a breakup of the 
euro, the spreads decreased.
Source: Haver Analytics.


=== PAGE 302 ===
476 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
support growth because defaults are usually accompanied by sharp recessions. The 
fear that this might happen shifted Italy from a “good” to a “bad” equilibrium. As 
investors recognized that a default and an exit from the euro were a possibility, inter-
est rates jumped to 6%, and this increase in interest rates validated the initial fears. 
Eventually, it was the European Central Bank (ECB) that shifted Italy back to the good 
equilibrium. On July 26, 2012, the president of the bank, Mario Draghi, clearly said 
that a breakup of the euro was out of question and that the ECB would do whatever 
was necessary to avoid it. Investors believed the promise and Italy shifted back to the 
good equilibrium.
Thus, Italy and Spain succeeded, with the help of the ECB, in avoiding bad debt 
dynamics and default. What if a government does not succeed in stabilizing the debt and 
enters a debt spiral? Then, historically, one of two things happens: The government either 
explicitly defaults on its debt or relies increasingly on money finance. Let’s look at each 
outcome.
Debt Default
At some point, when a government finds itself unable to repay the outstanding debt, 
it may decide to default. Default is often partial, however, and creditors take what is 
known as a haircut. A haircut of 30%, for example, means that creditors receive only 
70% of what they were owed. Default also comes under many names, many of them 
euphemisms—probably to make the prospects more appealing (or less unappealing) to 
creditors. It is called debt restructuring, or debt rescheduling (when interest pay-
ments are deferred rather than cancelled), or, quite ironically, private sector involve-
ment (the private sector, that is, the creditors, are asked to get involved, i.e., to accept a 
haircut). It may be unilaterally imposed by the government, or it may be the result of a 
negotiation with creditors, who, knowing that they will not be fully repaid in any case, 
may prefer to work out a deal with the government. This is what happened to Greece in 
2012 when private creditors accepted a haircut of roughly 50%.
When debt is very high, default would seem to be an appealing solution. Having a 
lower level of debt after default reduces the size of the required fiscal consolidation and thus 
makes it more credible. It lowers required taxes, potentially allowing for higher growth. But 
default comes with high costs. If debt is held, for example, by domestic pension funds, as 
is often the case, retirees may suffer very much from the default. If it is held by domestic 
banks, then some banks may go bankrupt, with major adverse effects on the economy. If 
debt is held instead mostly by foreigners, then the country’s international reputation may 
be lost and it may be difficult for the government to borrow from abroad for a long time. So, 
in general, and rightly so, governments are very reluctant to default on their debt.
Money Finance
The other outcome is money finance. So far we have assumed that the only way a gov-
ernment could finance itself was by selling bonds. There is however another possibility. 
The government can finance itself by, in effect, printing money. The way it does this is 
not actually by printing money itself but by issuing bonds and then requiring the central 
bank to buy its bonds in exchange for money. This process is called money finance or 
debt monetization. Because, in this case, the rate of money creation is determined by 
the government deficit rather than by decisions of the central bank, this is also known as 
fiscal dominance of monetary policy.
How large a deficit can a government finance through such money creation? Let H 
be the amount of central bank money in the economy. (I shall refer to central bank money 
simply as money for short in what follows.) Let ∆H be money creation; that is, the change 
in the nominal money stock from one month to the next. The revenue, in real terms (that 
By this statement, Mario 
Draghi meant that the ECB 
would be ready to buy 
Spanish or Italian bonds 
to maintain a low yield and 
go back to the “good equi-
librium.” In this event, the 
commitment was enough to 
decrease rates and the ECB 
did not have to intervene 
at all.
c
The danger is not completely 
gone. At the time of writing, 
the spread on Italian bonds 
remains high, around 2.5%, 
due partly to still-high debt 
and deficits, which slightly 
exceed EU rules, and wor-
ries that the government, 
despite its statements to the 
contrary, may consider a 
euro exit.
c
For a refresher on how the 
central bank creates money, 
go back to Chapter 4, 
Section 4-3.
c


=== PAGE 303 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
477
is, in terms of goods), that the government generates by creating an amount of money 
equal to ∆H is therefore ∆H>P—money creation during the period divided by the price 
level. This revenue from money creation is called seignorage.
seignorage = ∆H
P
Seignorage is equal to money creation divided by the price level. To see what rate of 
(central bank) nominal money growth is required to generate a given amount of seignor-
age, rewrite ∆H>P as
∆H
P
= ∆H
H  H
P
In words: We can think of seignorage 1∆H>P2 as the product of the rate of nominal 
money growth 1∆H>H2 and the real money stock 1H>P2. Replacing this expression in 
the previous equation gives
seignorage = ∆H
H  H
P
This gives us a relation between seignorage, the rate of nominal money growth, and 
real money balances. To think about relevant magnitudes, it is convenient to take one 
more step and divide both sides of the equation by, say, monthly GDP, Y, to get
 
seignorage
Y
= ∆H
H a
H>P
Y b 
(22.6)
Suppose the government is running a budget deficit equal to 10% of GDP and decides 
to finance it through seignorage, so 1deficit>Y2 = 1seignorage>Y2 = 10%. The average 
ratio of central bank money to monthly GDP in advanced countries is roughly equal to 1, 
so choose 1H>P2>Y = 1. This implies that nominal money growth must satisfy
10% = ∆H
H  times 1 1 ∆H
H
= 10%
Thus, to finance a deficit of 10% of GDP through seignorage, given a ratio of central 
bank money to monthly GDP of 1, the monthly growth rate of nominal money must be 
equal to 10%.
This is surely a high rate of money growth, but one might conclude that, in 
exceptional circumstances, it may be an acceptable price to pay to finance the deficit. 
Unfortunately, this conclusion would be wrong. As money growth increases, inflation 
typically follows. And high inflation leads people to want to reduce their demand for 
money, and in turn the demand for central bank money. In other words, as the rate of 
money growth increases, the real money balances that people want to hold decreases. 
If, for example, they were willing to hold money balances equal to one month of income 
when inflation was low, they may decide to reduce it to one week of income or less when 
inflation reaches 10%. In terms of equation (22.6), as 1∆H>H2 increases, 1H>P2>Y 
decreases. And so, to achieve the same level of revenues, the government needs to 
increase the rate of money growth further. But higher money growth leads to further 
inflation, a further decrease in 1H>P2>Y, and the need for further money growth.
Soon, high inflation turns into hyperinflation, the term that economists use for 
very high inflation—typically inflation in excess of 30% per month. The Focus Box 
“Money Financing and Hyperinflations” describes some of the most famous episodes. 
The word seignorage is 
revealing. The right to issue 
money was a precious 
source of revenue for the sei-
gneurs, or lords, of the past. 
They could buy the goods 
they wanted by issuing their 
own money and using it to 
pay for the goods.
c
This is an example of a 
general proposition. As you 
increase the tax rate (here the 
rate of inflation), the tax base 
(here real money balances) 
decreases.
b


=== PAGE 304 ===
478 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
Money Financing and Hyperinflations
We saw in this chapter that the attempt to finance a large 
 fiscal deficit through money creation can lead to high inflation, 
or even hyperinflation. This scenario has played out many 
times in the past. (At the time of writing, it is playing out in 
Venezuela, where annual inflation hit 80,000% in 2018!) You 
probably have heard of the hyperinflation that took place in 
post–World War I Germany. In 1913, the value of all currency 
circulating in Germany was 6 billion marks. Ten years later, 
in October 1923, 6 billion marks was barely enough to buy a 
one-kilo loaf of rye bread in Berlin. A month later, the price of 
the same loaf of bread had increased to 428 billion marks. But 
the German hyperinflation is not the only example.
Table 1 summarizes the seven major hyperinflations that 
followed World War I and World War II. They share a num-
ber of features. They were all short (lasting a year or so) but 
intense, with money growth and inflation running at 50% 
per month or more. The increases in the price levels were stag-
gering. As you can see, the largest price increase occurred not 
in Germany but in Hungary after World War II: What cost 1 
Hungarian pengő in August 1945 cost 3,800 trillions of tril-
lions of pengős less than a year later! And Hungary has the 
distinction of having not one but two hyperinflations, one 
after World War I and the other after World War II.
Inflation rates of this magnitude have not been seen 
since the 1940s. But many countries have experienced high 
inflation as a result of money finance. Monthly inflation 
ran above 20% in many Latin American countries in the 
late 1980s. A recent example of high inflation is Zimbabwe, 
where, in 2008, monthly inflation reached 500% before a 
stabilization program was adopted in early 2009. At the 
time of writing, monthly inflation has reached 300% in 
Venezuela. The photo shows a creative and more valuable 
use of bolívares, the Venezuelan money.
It will come as no surprise that hyperinflations have enor-
mous economic costs:
 
■
The transaction system works less and less well. One 
famous example of inefficient exchange occurred in 
Germany at the end of its hyperinflation in 1923. 
People had to use wheelbarrows to cart around the huge 
amounts of currency needed for daily transactions.
 
■
Price signals become less and less useful. Because prices 
change so often, it is difficult for consumers and produc-
ers to assess the relative prices of goods and to make 
informed decisions. The evidence shows that the higher 
the rate of inflation, the higher the variation in the rela-
tive prices of different goods. Thus, the price system, 
which is crucial to the functioning of a market econ-
omy, also becomes less and less efficient. A joke heard in 
Israel during the high inflation of the 1980s: “Why is it 
cheaper to take the taxi rather than the bus? Because in 
the bus, you have to pay the fare at the beginning of the 
ride. In the taxi, you pay only at the end.”
 
■
Swings in the inflation rate become larger. It becomes 
harder to predict what inflation will be in the near future, 
whether it will be, say, 500% or 1,000% over the next year. 
Borrowing at a given nominal interest rate becomes more 
and more of a gamble. If we borrow at, say, 1,000% for a 
year, we may end up paying a real interest rate of 500% 
or 0%: a large difference! The result is that borrowing 
and lending typically come to a stop in the final months 
of hyperinflation, leading to a large decline in investment.
FOCUS
Country
Start
End
PT>P0
Average Monthly 
Inflation Rate (%)
Average Monthly 
Money Growth (%)
Austria
Oct. 1921
Aug. 1922
70
47
31
Germany
Aug. 1922
Nov. 1923
1.0 * 1010
322
314
Greece
Nov. 1943
Nov. 1944
4.7 * 106
365
220
Hungary 1
Mar. 1923
Feb. 1924
44
46
33
Hungary 2
Aug. 1945
Jul. 1946
3.8 * 1027
19,800
12,200
Poland
Jan. 1923
Jan. 1924
699
82
72
Russia
Dec. 1921
Jan. 1924
1.2 * 105
57
49
PT>P0
 : Price level in the last month of hyperinflation divided by the price level in the first month.
Source: Philip Cagan, “The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation,” in Milton Friedman ed., Studies in the Quantity 
Theory of Money (University of Chicago Press, 1956), Table 1.
Table 1 
Seven Hyperinflations of the 1920s and 1940s


=== OCR TEXT PAGE 304 ===
478

Money Financing and Hyperinflations

We saw in this chapter that the attempt to finance a large
fiscal deficit through money creation can lead to high inflation,

or even hyperinflation. This scenario has played out many

times in the past. (At the time of writing, it is playing out in
Venezuela, where annual inflation hit 80,000% in 2018!) You
probably have heard of the hyperinflation that took place in
post-World War I Germany. In 1913, the value of all currency

circulating in Germany was 6 billion marks. Ten years later,
in October 1923, 6 billion marks was barely enough to buy a
one-kilo loaf of rye bread in Berlin. A month later, the price of
the same loaf of bread had increased to 428 billion marks. But
the German hyperinflation is not the only example.

Table 1 summarizes the seven major hyperinflations that
followed World War I and World War II. They share a num-

ber of features. They were all short (lasting a year or so) but il

intense, with money growth and inflation running at 50%
per month or more. The increases in the price levels were stag-
gering. As you can see, the largest price increase occurred not
in Germany but in Hungary after World War II: What cost 1
Hungarian pengé in August 1945 cost 3,800 trillions of tril-

lions of pengés less than a year later! And Hungary has the
distinction of having not one but two hyperinflations, one
after World War | and the other after World War II.

Inflation rates of this magnitude have not been seen

since the 1940s. But many countries have experienced high
inflation as a result of money finance. Monthly inflation
ran above 20% in many Latin American countries in the
late 1980s. A recent example of high inflation is Zimbabwe,
where, in 2008, monthly inflation reached 500% before a
stabilization program was adopted in early 2009. At the
time of writing, monthly inflation has reached 300% in
Venezuela. The photo shows a creative and more valuable
use of bolivares, the Venezuelan money.

It will come as no surprise that hyperinflations have enor-
mous economic costs:

The transaction system works less and less well. One
famous example of inefficient exchange occurred in
Germany at the end of its hyperinflation in 1923.

People had to use wheelbarrows to cart around the huge
amounts of currency needed for daily transactions.
Price signals become less and less useful. Because prices
change so ofien, it is difficult for consumers and produc-
ers to assess the relative prices of goods and to make
informed decisions. The evidence shows that the higher
the rate of inflation, the higher the variation in the rela-
tive prices of different goods. Thus, the price system,
which is crucial to the functioning of a market econ-
omy, also becomes less and less efficient. A joke heard in
Israel during the high inflation of the 1980s: “Why is it
cheaper to take the taxi rather than the bus? Because in
the bus, you have to pay the fare at the beginning of the
ride. In the taxi, you pay only at the end.”

‘Swings in the inflation rate become larger. It becomes
harder to predict what inflation will be in the near future,
whether it will be, say, 500% or 1,000% over the next year.
Borrowing at a given nominal interest rate becomes more
and more of a gamble. If we borrow at, say, 1,000% fora
year, we may end up paying a real interest rate of 500%
or 0%: a large difference! The result is that borrowing
and lending typically come to a stop in the final months
of hyperinflation, leading to a large decline in investment.

Table 1 Seven Hyperinflations of the 1920s and 1940s

Average Monthly | Average Monthly
Country Start End P;/Po Inflation Rate (%) | Money Growth (%)
Austria Oct. 1921 | Aug. 1922 70 47 31
Germany | Aug. 1922 | Nov. 1923 | 4.9 x 101° 322 314
Greece Nov. 1943 | Nov. 1944 | 4.7 x 108 365 220
Hungary 1 | Mar. 1923 | Feb. 1924 44 46 33
Hungary 2 | Aug. 1945 | Jul. 1946 | 3.8 x 1027 19,800 12,200
Poland Jan. 1923 | Jan. 1924 699 82 72
Russia Dec. 1921 | Jan. 1924 | 4.2 x 405 57 49
P,/Py: Price level in the last month of hyperinflation divided by the price level in the first month.
Source: Philip Cagan, “The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation,” in Milton Friedman ed., Studies in the Quantity
Theory of Money (University of Chicago Press, 1956), Table 1

Back to Policy Extensions


=== PAGE 305 ===
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
479
Hyperinflation ends only when fiscal policy is dramatically improved and the need to 
finance the deficit through money creation is eliminated. By then, the damage has been 
done.
As inflation becomes very high, there is typically an increasing consensus that it should 
be stopped. Eventually, the government reduces the deficit and no longer has recourse to 
money finance. Inflation stops, but not before the economy has suffered substantial costs.
22-5 THE CHALLENGES FACING US 
FISCAL POLICY TODAY
How bad is the debt situation in the United States today? In 2018, the debt issued by the 
federal government—the number that is typically quoted in newspapers, called gross 
debt—stood at $21,300 billion, or 104% of GDP. Part of that debt was held, however, by 
some government entities—for example, by the social security trust fund. The more rel-
evant number, namely debt held by the public, called net debt, stood at $5,750  billion, 
or 77% of GDP, a substantially lower ratio than the gross debt ratio, although still a his-
torically high number.
The federal deficit stood at $780 billion, or 3.8% of GDP. The ratio of interest pay-
ments to GDP was 1.6%, so the primary deficit (that is, the deficit net of interest  payments) 
was equal to 3.8% - 1.6% = 2.2%; again, not a very high number, but still historically 
high in the absence of a war or a recession.
To see what this implied for debt dynamics, let’s return to equation (22.5). Recall 
that the change in the debt ratio is equal to the sum of two terms: first, the difference 
between the interest rate and the growth rate, times the debt-to-GDP ratio; second, the 
ratio of the primary deficit to GDP:
Bt
Yt
- Bt - 1
Yt - 1
= 1r - g2Bt - 1
Yt - 1
+ 1Gt - Tt2
Yt
In 2018, the real interest rate on government debt was 0.5%—the difference 
between the nominal interest rate, 2.5%, and inflation, 2%. The growth rate was 
equal to 2.9%. The debt-to-GDP ratio was 77%, so the first term above was equal to 
10.5% - 2.9%2 * 77% = -1.8%. Absent a primary deficit, the debt-to-GDP ratio would 
have declined by −1.8%. The primary deficit was positive, however, equal to 2.2%. Putting the 
two together, this implies that the debt ratio increased slightly, by -1.8% + 2.2% = 0.4% 
of GDP.
An increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio of 0.4% of GDP is small and suggests little rea-
son for concern. The future, however, may see larger increases in debt: At 2.9%, growth 
was unusually high in 2018 and is forecast to be closer to 2%. And looking forward, two 
major government spending items look set to substantially increase:
 
■
Social security payments are projected to increase from 4.9% of GDP in 2018 to 
6.0% in 2029, reflecting the aging of America—the rapid increase in the proportion 
of people older than age 65 that will take place as the Baby Boom generation reaches 
retirement age.
 
■
Medicare (the program that provides health care to retirees) and Medicaid (the program 
that provides health care to poor people) are projected to increase from 5.4% of GDP in 
2018 to 7.2% in 2029. This large increase reflects the increasing cost of health care in 
the case of Medicaid and the increasing number of retirees in the case of Medicare.
Given these expected increases in spending, and for the reasons we discussed earlier 
in the chapter, it may be desirable to increase taxes and decrease the debt-to-GDP ratio 


=== PAGE 306 ===
480 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
now so as to have current taxpayers assume more of the burden of the increased future 
spending, as well as to avoid large, potentially distortionary, increases in taxes later on. 
This suggests starting to decrease the debt-to-GDP ratio now by reducing primary deficits 
or even generating primary surpluses, rather than letting debt increase further.
How much and at what rate should primary deficits be reduced? There are three rel-
evant arguments here.
The first is that the real interest rate the government pays on its debt is currently 
very low, indeed lower than the growth rate. Figure 22-3 shows the evolution of the real 
interest rate, constructed as the nominal one-year T-bill rate minus actual CPI inflation 
since 1960. It shows that, after a sharp increase in the 1980s, the real rate has decreased 
from a peak of nearly 7% in 1984 to −0.3% in 2018. Current forecasts are that the inter-
est rate will remain lower than the growth rate for the foreseeable future.
This has two implications. The first is that, while government debt is high, debt ser-
vice, i.e., the interest paid on the debt, is still low. The second is that, if the interest rate 
remains lower than the growth rate, the government can decrease the ratio of debt to 
GDP over time while still running primary deficits. To see this, go back to equation (22.5) 
and the computation of debt dynamics we went through earlier. In 2018, absent a pri-
mary deficit, the debt-to-GDP ratio would have decreased by 1.8%. Put another way, the 
government could have run a primary deficit of up to 1.8% of GDP, and the debt-to-GDP 
ratio would still have declined. The difference between the growth rate and the interest 
rate is likely to be smaller in the future, but so long as the interest rate remains less than 
the growth rate, this implies that the government can run a (limited) primary deficit and 
still have the debt-to-GDP ratio decrease over time.
The second argument focuses on public investment. One of the ways the government 
deficit was reduced after the large increase during the Great Recession was by cutting 
public investment. In 2018, the ratio of government investment to GDP was the lowest it 
had been since 1950. There is a strong case for increasing it, and the case is strengthened 
by the fact that the cost of borrowing for the government is very low. Thus, there is an 
argument for accepting or even increasing the current primary deficits, if these are used 
to finance public investment instead of current spending or reductions in taxes.
The third argument may be the most important. We saw in Chapter 5 that to avoid a 
decrease in output in response to a reduction in the budget deficit the central bank must 
The average real interest rate 
on government debt was, as 
we saw earlier, a bit higher 
(0.5%) because the maturity 
of the government debt is 
longer than one year and 
long rates were higher than 
the one-year rate.
c
This has been true not only 
in the United States, but in 
most countries. Fiscal con-
solidation often leads to cuts 
in public investment rather 
than in current spending, 
because it is less visible, 
affects current voters less, 
and is thus politically less 
costly.
c
24
22
0
2
4
6
8
1960
1963
1966
1969
1972
1975
1978
1981
1984
1987
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008
2011
2014
2017
Real interest rate on 1-year T-bills
(percent)  
Figure 22-3
The Evolution of the Real 
Interest Rate on One-
Year T-Bills since 1960
After sharply increasing in 
the early 1980s, the real 
interest rate has steadily 
declined.
Source: FRED: TB1YR, 
CPIAUCSL


=== PAGE 307 ===
decrease the interest rate. While, at the time of writing, the US economy is no longer at 
the zero lower bound, the nominal policy rate, at 2.4%, is still low. A large reduction in 
primary deficits would require a large decrease in the policy rate, a decrease that may be 
infeasible given the zero lower bound.
A back-of-the-envelope computation is useful here: Suppose that the multiplier asso-
ciated with a reduction in government spending is equal to 1.5, so a 1% reduction in 
the primary deficit decreases demand by 1.5%. Suppose that a 1% decrease in the policy 
rate increases demand by 1%. Then, to avoid a decrease in output, a reduction in the 
ratio of the primary deficit to GDP by 2% would require a decrease in the policy rate of 
3%, thus a larger decrease than is feasible given the zero lower bound. Put another way, 
given the limits on monetary policy, primary deficits may be needed to maintain output 
at potential.
To summarize: The US debt-to-GDP ratio is high and slowly increasing over time. 
Given the likely increases in spending in the future, it would be desirable to reduce pri-
mary deficits and reduce the debt ratio. Low interest rates, and by implication the low 
cost of debt, imply that it can be done slowly. And because low interest rates, together 
with the zero lower bound, put sharp limits on the use of monetary policy, they also imply 
that it has to be done slowly so as to avoid a decrease in demand and output.
SUMMARY
 
■The government budget constraint gives the evolution of 
government debt as a function of spending and taxes. One 
way of expressing the constraint is that the change in debt 
(the deficit) is equal to the primary deficit plus interest pay-
ments on the debt. The primary deficit is the difference 
between government spending on goods and services, G, 
and taxes net of transfers, T.
 
■The evolution of the ratio of debt to GDP depends on four 
factors: the interest rate, the growth rate, the initial debt 
ratio, and the primary surplus.
 
■Under the Ricardian equivalence proposition, a larger deficit 
is offset by an equal increase in private saving. Deficits have 
no effect on demand or output. The accumulation of debt 
does not affect capital accumulation. In practice, however, 
Ricardian equivalence fails and larger deficits lead to higher 
demand and higher output in the short run. The accumula-
tion of debt leads to lower capital accumulation, and thus to 
lower output in the long run.
 
■To stabilize the economy, the government should run defi-
cits during recessions and surpluses during booms. The 
cyclically adjusted deficit tells us what the deficit would be, 
under existing tax and spending rules, if output were at its 
potential level.
 
■Deficits are justified in times of high spending, such as wars. 
Relative to an increase in taxes, deficits lead to higher con-
sumption and lower investment during wars. They therefore 
shift some of the burden of the war from people living dur-
ing the war to those living after the war. Deficits also help 
smooth taxes and reduce tax distortions.
 
■High debt ratios increase the risk of vicious cycles. A higher 
perceived risk of default can lead to a higher interest rate 
and an increase in debt. The increase in debt can lead to a 
higher perceived risk of default and a higher interest rate. 
Together, both can combine to lead to a debt explosion. 
Governments may have no choice but to default or to rely on 
money finance. Money finance may in turn lead to hyper-
inflation. In either case, the economic costs are likely to be 
high.
 
■The US debt-to-GDP ratio is high and slowly increasing. It 
would be desirable to reduce this ratio over time. The limits 
on the use of monetary policy imply that the reduction will 
have to be gradual and limited.
KEY TERMS
inflation-adjusted deficit, 463
government budget constraint, 463
primary deficit, 465
primary surplus, 465
debt-to-GDP ratio, 468
debt ratio, 468
Ricardian equivalence, 470
Ricardo-Barro proposition, 470
full-employment deficit, 471
mid-cycle deficit, 471
standardized employment deficit, 471
structural deficit, 471
cyclically adjusted deficit, 471
automatic stabilizer, 472
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
481


=== PAGE 308 ===
tax smoothing, 474
spread, 475
basis points, 475
haircut, 476
debt restructuring, 476
debt rescheduling, 476
private sector involvement, 476
money finance, 476
debt monetization, 476
fiscal dominance, 476
seignorage, 477
hyperinflation, 477
gross debt, 479
net debt, 479
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using information in this chapter, label each of the following 
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. The deficit is the difference between real government 
spending and taxes net of transfers.
b. The primary deficit is the difference between government 
spending on goods and services and taxes net of transfers.
c. The United States has experienced wide fluctuations in the 
ratio of debt to GDP in the past century.
d. Tax smoothing and deficit finance help spread the burden 
of war across generations.
e. The government should always take immediate action to 
eliminate a cyclically adjusted budget deficit.
f. If Ricardian equivalence holds, then an increase in income 
taxes will affect neither consumption nor saving.
g. The ratio of debt to GDP cannot exceed 100%.
h. A haircut reduces the value of outstanding government 
debt outstanding.
i. The cyclically adjusted deficit is always smaller than the 
actual deficit.
j. The inflation-adjusted deficit is always smaller than the 
actual deficit.
k. When the ratio of debt to GDP is high, the best policy is a 
fiscal consolidation.
l. A hyperinflation is an inflation rate greater than 30% per 
month.
m. Hyperinflations may distort prices, but they have no effect 
on real output.
2. Consider the following statement:
A deficit during a war can be a good thing. First, the deficit is tem-
porary, so after the war is over, the government can go right back to its 
old level of spending and taxes. Second, given that the evidence supports 
the Ricardian equivalence proposition, the deficit will stimulate the 
economy during wartime, helping to keep the unemployment rate low.
Identify the mistakes in this statement. Is anything in this 
statement correct?
3. Consider an economy characterized by the following facts:
i. The official budget deficit is 4% of GDP.
ii. The debt-to-GDP ratio is 100%.
iii. The nominal interest rate is 10%.
iv. The inflation rate is 7%.
a. What is the primary deficit/surplus ratio to GDP?
b. What is the inflation-adjusted deficit/surplus ratio to 
GDP? There is a “rule-of-thumb” in the chapter to understand 
how the actual deficit changes when output falls below its natu-
ral level.
c. Suppose that output is 2% below its natural level. What is 
the cyclically adjusted, inflation-adjusted deficit/surplus 
ratio to GDP?
d. Suppose instead that output begins at its natural level and 
that output growth remains constant at the normal rate of 
2%. How will the debt-to-GDP ratio change over time?
4. Assume that money demand takes the form
M
P = Y31 - 1r + pe24
where Y = 1,000 and r = 0.1.
a. Assume that, in the short run, pe is constant and equal to 
25%. Calculate the amount of seignorage for each annual 
rate of money growth, ∆M>M, listed.
a. 25%
b. 50%
c. 75%
b. In the medium run, pe = p = ∆M>M. Compute the 
amount of seignorage associated with the three rates of 
annual money growth in part a. Explain why the answers 
differ from those in part a.
DIG DEEPER
5. Consider the economy described in Problem 3 and assume that 
there is a fixed exchange rate, EQ . Suppose that financial investors 
worry that the level of debt is too high and that the government 
may devalue to stimulate output (and therefore tax revenues) to 
help pay down the debt. Financial investors begin to expect a devalu-
ation of 10%. In other words, the expected exchange rate, Ee
t + 1, 
decreases by 10% from its previous value of EQ.
a. Recall the uncovered interest parity condition:
it = i*t - Et + 1
e
- EQ
EQ
 If the foreign interest rate remains constant at 10% a 
year, what must happen to the domestic interest rate 
when Ee
t + 1 decreases by 10%?
b. Suppose that domestic inflation remains the same. What 
happens to the domestic real interest rate? What is likely to 
happen to the growth rate?
c. What happens to the official budget deficit? What happens 
to the inflation-adjusted deficit?
482 
Back to Policy 
Extensions


=== PAGE 309 ===
d. Suppose the growth rate decreases from 2% to 0%. What 
happens to the change in the debt ratio? (Assume that the 
primary deficit/surplus ratio to GDP is unchanged, even 
though the fall in growth may reduce tax revenues.)
6. Ricardian equivalence and fiscal policy
First consider an economy in which Ricardian equivalence 
does not hold.
a. Suppose the government starts with a balanced budget. 
Then, there is an increase in government spending, but 
there is no change in taxes. Show in an IS-LM diagram the 
effect of this policy on output in the short run when the cen-
tral bank keeps the real interest rate constant. How will the 
government finance the increase in government spending?
b. Suppose, as in part a, that the government starts with a 
balanced budget and then increases government spending. 
This time, however, assume that taxes increase by the same 
amount as government spending. Show in an IS-LM dia-
gram the effect of this policy on output in the short run. 
(It may help to recall the discussion of the multiplier in 
Chapter 3. Does government spending or tax policy have 
a bigger multiplier?) How does the output effect compare 
with the effect in part a?
Now suppose Ricardian equivalence holds in this economy. 
[Parts c and d do not require use of diagrams.]
c. Consider again an increase in government spending with 
no change in taxes. How does the output effect compare to 
the output effects in parts a and b?
d. Consider again an increase in government spending com-
bined with an increase in taxes of the same amount. How 
does this output effect compare to the output effects in 
parts a and b?
e. Comment on each of the following statements:
i. “Under Ricardian equivalence, government spending 
has no effect on output.”
ii. “Under Ricardian equivalence, changes in taxes have 
no effect on output.”
EXPLORE FURTHER
7. Consider an economy characterized by the following facts:
i. The debt-to-GDP ratio is 40%.
ii. The primary deficit is 4% of GDP.
iii. The normal growth rate is 3%.
iv. The real interest rate is 3%.
a. Using your favorite spreadsheet software, compute the 
debt-to-GDP ratio in 10 years, assuming that the primary 
deficit stays at 4% of GDP each year; the economy grows at 
the normal growth rate in each year; and the real interest 
rate is constant at 3%.
b. Suppose the real interest rate increases to 5%, but every-
thing else remains as in part a. Compute the debt-to-GDP 
ratio in 10 years.
c. Suppose the normal growth rate falls to 1%, and the 
economy grows at the normal growth rate each year. 
Everything else remains as in part a. Calculate the debt-to-
GDP ratio in 10 years. Compare your answer to part b.
d. Return to the assumptions of part a. Suppose policymak-
ers decide that a debt-to-GDP ratio of more than 50% 
is dangerous. Verify that reducing the primary deficit 
to 1% immediately and that maintaining this deficit for 
10 years will produce a debt-to-GDP ratio of 50% in 10 
years. Thereafter, what value of the primary deficit will be 
required to maintain the debt-to-GDP ratio of 50%?
e. Continuing with part d, suppose policy makers wait 5 
years before changing fiscal policy. For five years, the pri-
mary deficit remains at 4% of GDP. What is the debt-to-
GDP ratio in 5 years? Suppose that after five years, policy 
makers decide to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio to 50%. In 
years 6 through 10, what constant value of the primary 
deficit will produce a debt-to-GDP ratio of 50% at the end 
of year 10?
f. Suppose that policy makers carry out the policy in either 
parts d or e. If these policies reduce the growth rate of out-
put for a while, how will this affect the size of the reduction 
in the primary deficit required to achieve a debt-to-GDP 
ratio of 50% in 10 years?
g. Which policy—the one in part d or the one in part e—
do you think is more dangerous to the stability of the 
economy?
8. The fiscal situation in the United States and in other countries
From the FRED economic database at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, you can retrieve two series: 
General Government Gross Debt of the United States 
(GGGDTAUSA188N) and a measure of the primary deficit 
(USAGGXONLBGDP). Both are measured as a percent of GDP. 
These are measures that incorporate all levels of government. This 
data are constructed by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). 
Using data from the IMF or other international organizations 
helps make a better comparison across countries.
a. What is the ratio of debt to GDP in the United States in the 
most recent available year? Describe the path of this vari-
able in the last decade?
b. What is the change in the ratio of debt-to-GDP in the last 
year of the data? Can the debt-to-GDP ratio fall even if the 
primary deficit is positive?
c. Use the information on the change in the debt-to-GDP ratio 
and the primary deficit ratio to infer the missing term in 
equation (22.5) in the last year of the data. Does your cal-
culation make sense to you?
d. Similar data are constructed for all countries. A con-
venient source that compares the fiscal situation for 
the overall government sector in the G7 countries is 
published by Canada’s Department of Finance in a 
document called the “Fiscal Reference Tables.” The sec-
tion titled International Fiscal Comparisons at the end 
of the document presents the most recent data. Which 
large economy has the highest and lowest ratio of gross 
debt to GDP? Which country has the highest and low-
est deficit as a percent of GDP? Are these overall deficits 
or primary deficits?
 
Chapter 22 
Fiscal Policy: A Summing Up  
483


=== PAGE 310 ===
9. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) is required to produce a 
forecast of the federal fiscal situation each year. This question uses 
the version published in January 2019. There is a document entitled 
“A Visual Summary of The Budget and Economic Outlook 2019 to 
2029.” Find the relevant figures that help answer the questions below.
a. Is the federal government expected to be in deficit or sur-
plus over the 10-year horizon?
b. In this presentation do outlays include the interest on the 
debt? Do they include transfers?
c. Is the ratio of debt to GDP expected to rise or fall over the 
10-year horizon?
d. What is the CBO assuming about the term (r-g) in the 
equation describing the change in the debt-to-GDP 
ratio?
FURTHER READINGS
 
■The modern statement of the Ricardian equivalence proposi-
tion is Robert Barro’s “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?”, 
Journal of Political Economy, 1974, 82(6): pp. 1095–1117.
 
■Each year, the Congressional Budget Office publishes The 
Economic and Budget Outlook for the current and future 
 fiscal years. The document provides a clear and unbiased 
presentation of the current US budget, current budget 
issues, and budget trends. Available at www.cbo.gov/.
 
■For more on the German hyperinflation, read Steven 
Webb, Hyperinflation and Stabilization in the Weimar Republic 
(Oxford University Press, 1989).
 
■A good review of what economists know and don’t know 
about hyperinflation is given in Rudiger Dornbusch, 
Federico Sturzenegger, and Holger Wolf, “Extreme 
Inflation: Dynamics and Stabilization,” Brookings Papers 
on Economic Activity, 1990, Vol. 2, pp. 1–84.
 
■For the debate on “fiscal austerity” in Europe, see www.
voxeu.org/debates/has-austerity-gone-too-far.
484 
Back to Policy 
Extensions


=== PAGE 311 ===
485
Monetary Policy:  
A Summing Up
F
or the two decades before the Great Recession, most central banks had converged 
toward a framework for monetary policy, called inflation targeting. It was based on 
two principles: The first was that the primary goal of monetary policy was to keep 
inflation stable and low. The second was that the best way to achieve this goal was 
to follow, explicitly or implicitly, an interest rate rule, allowing the policy rate to respond to 
movements in inflation and in activity.
Until the crisis, this framework appeared to work well. Inflation decreased and remained 
low and stable in most countries. Output fluctuations decreased in amplitude. The period 
became known as the Great Moderation. Many researchers concluded that better monetary 
policy was one of the main factors behind the improvement, consolidating the support for 
this monetary policy framework.
Then the crisis came. It forced macroeconomists and central bankers to reassess along 
at least two dimensions.
The first is the set of issues raised by the liquidity trap. If and when an economy reaches 
the zero lower bound, the policy rate can no longer be used to increase activity. This raises 
two questions: First, can monetary policy be conducted in such a way as to avoid getting 
to the zero lower bound in the first place? Second, once the economy is at the zero lower 
bound, are there other tools that the central bank can use to help increase activity?
The second concerns the mandate of the central bank and the tools of monetary policy. 
From the early 2000s to the start of the crisis, most advanced economies appeared to do 
well, with sustained output growth and stable inflation. Yet, as we saw in Chapter 6, behind 
the scenes not everything was fine. Important changes were taking place in the financial 
system, such as the large increase in leverage and the increased reliance on wholesale fund-
ing by banks. In many countries, also, there were sharp increases in housing prices. These 
factors turned out to be at the source of the crisis. This raises two more questions: Looking 
forward, should the central bank worry not only about inflation and activity but also about 
asset prices, stock market booms, housing booms, and risk in the financial sector? And if 
so, what tools does it have at its disposal?
This chapter reviews what we have learned about monetary policy so far, then describes 
the logic of inflation targeting and the use of an interest rate rule, and finally discusses where 
macroeconomists stand on the issues raised by the crisis.
Section 23-1 takes stock of what we have learned in this book so far.
Section 23-2 describes the inflation-targeting framework.
Section 23-3 reviews the costs and benefits of inflation and draws implications for the 
choice of a target inflation rate.
Section 23-4 describes the monetary policy measures taken by central banks when they 
hit the zero lower bound and since then.
Section 23-5 discusses the potential role of central banks in ensuring financial stability.
23


=== PAGE 312 ===
486 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
23-1  WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED
 
■
In Chapter 4 we looked at money demand and money supply and the determination 
of the interest rate.
We saw how the central bank controls the policy rate through changes in the 
money supply. We saw also that, when the policy rate reaches zero, a case known 
as the liquidity trap or the zero lower bound, further increases in the money supply 
have no effect on the policy rate.
 
■
In Chapter 5 we looked at the short-run effects of monetary policy on output.
We saw that a decrease in the interest rate leads to an increase in spending and, 
in turn, an increase in output. We saw how monetary and fiscal policy can be used to 
affect both the level of output and its composition.
 
■
In Chapter 6, we introduced two important distinctions, first between the nominal 
and the real interest rate and, second, between the borrowing rate and the policy 
rate. The real interest rate is equal to the nominal interest rate minus expected infla-
tion. The borrowing rate is equal to the policy rate plus a risk premium.
We saw that what matters for private spending decisions is the real borrowing 
rate. We discussed how the state of the financial system affects the relation between 
the policy rate and the borrowing rate.
 
■
In Chapter 9 we looked at the effects of monetary policy in the medium run.
We saw that, in the medium run, monetary policy affects neither output nor 
the real interest rate. Output returns to potential, and the real interest rate returns 
to its natural rate, also called the neutral rate or the Wicksellian rate of interest. Higher 
money growth does not affect either output or the real interest rate, but leads to 
higher inflation.
We saw, however, how the zero lower bound may derail this adjustment. High 
unemployment may lead to deflation, which, at the zero lower bound, leads to a 
higher real interest rate, which further decreases demand and further increases 
unemployment.
 
■
In Chapter 14 we introduced another important distinction, between short-term 
and long-term interest rates.
We saw that long term-interest rates depend on expectations of future short-
term rates and a term premium. We saw that stock prices depend on expected future 
short-term rates, future dividends, and an equity premium.
We saw, however, that stock prices may be subject to bubbles or fads, making the 
prices differ from the fundamental values of the stocks.
 
■
In Chapter 16 we looked at the effects of expectations on spending and output, and 
the role of monetary policy in this context.
We saw that monetary policy affects the short-term nominal interest rate, but 
that spending depends on current and expected future short-term real interest rates. 
We saw that the effects of monetary policy on output depend crucially on how 
expectations respond to monetary policy.
 
■
In Chapter 19 we looked at the effects of monetary policy in an economy open in 
both goods markets and financial markets.
If you remember one basic message from this chapter, it should be: Before the cri-
sis, monetary policy had converged to a framework called inflation targeting. The 
crisis has forced a reassessment of both the mandate and of the tools, a reassess-
ment that is still going on. 


=== PAGE 313 ===
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
487
We saw that, in an open economy, monetary policy affects spending and output 
not only through the interest rate but also through the exchange rate. An increase in 
money leads to both a decrease in the interest rate and a depreciation, both of which 
increase spending and output. We saw that, under fixed exchange rates, the central 
bank gives up monetary policy as a policy instrument.
 
■
In Chapter 20 we discussed the pros and cons of flexible exchange rates versus fixed 
exchange rates.
We saw that, under flexible exchange rates, interest rate movements can lead to 
large changes in exchange rates; under fixed exchange rates, speculation can lead to 
an exchange rate crisis and a sharp devaluation. We discussed the pros and cons of 
adopting a common currency such as the euro, or even giving up monetary policy 
altogether through the adoption of a currency board or dollarization.
 
■
In Chapter 21 we looked at the problems facing macroeconomic policy in general, 
and monetary policy in particular.
We saw that uncertainty about the effects of policy should lead to more cau-
tious policies. We saw that even well-intentioned policymakers may sometimes not 
do what is best, and that there is a case to be made for putting restraints on policy-
makers. We also looked at the benefits of having an independent central bank and of 
appointing a conservative central banker.
In this chapter we extend the analysis to look first at the inflation targeting framework in 
place before the crisis, and then at the challenges to monetary policy raised by the crisis.
23-2 FROM MONEY TARGETING  
TO INFLATION TARGETING
One can think of the goals of monetary policy as twofold: First, to maintain low and 
stable inflation; second, to stabilize output around potential—to avoid or at least limit 
recessions or booms.
Money Targeting
Until the 1980s, the strategy was to choose a target rate of money growth and to allow 
for deviations from that target rate as a function of activity. The rationale was simple. A 
low target rate of money growth implied a low average rate of inflation. In recessions, 
the central bank could increase money growth, leading to a decrease in interest rates and 
an increase in output. In booms, the central bank could decrease money growth, leading 
to an increase in interest rates and a slowdown in output.
That strategy did not work well.
First, the relation between money growth and inflation turned out to be far from 
tight, even in the medium run. This is shown in Figure 23-1, which plots 10-year aver-
ages of the US inflation rate against 10-year averages of the growth rate of money from 
1970 to the crisis (the way to read the figure: The numbers for inflation and for money 
growth for 2000, for example, are the average inflation rate and the average growth 
rate of money from 1991 to 2000). The inflation rate is constructed using the consumer 
price index (CPI) as the price index. The growth rate of nominal money is constructed 
using the sum of currency and checkable deposits, known as M1, as the measure for the 
money stock.
The reason for using 10-year averages should be clear. In the short run, changes in 
nominal money growth affect mostly interest rates and output rather than inflation. It 


=== PAGE 314 ===
488 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
From Chapter 5, equation (5.3): 
The real money supply (the left 
side) must be equal to the real 
demand for money (the right 
side):
M
P = Y L1i2
If, as a result of the introduc-
tion of credit cards, the real 
demand for money halves, 
then
M
P = 1
2 Y L1i2
In the short run, P does not 
change, and so the inter-
est rate must adjust. In the 
medium run, P adjusts. For 
a given level of output and 
a given interest rate, M>P 
must halve. Given M, this 
implies that P must double.
c
is only in the medium run that a relation between nominal money growth and inflation 
should emerge. Taking 10-year averages of both nominal money growth and inflation is 
a way of detecting such a medium-run relation. The reason for stopping at the crisis is 
that, as we saw in Chapter 4, when an economy hits the zero lower bound (which the US 
economy did at the end of 2008), increases in the money supply no longer have an effect 
on the policy rate and, by implication, the central bank is no longer able to affect output 
and inflation; so we exclude the period during which the US economy was stuck at the 
zero lower bound.
Figure 23-1 shows that, for the United States, the relation between M1 growth and 
inflation was not tight. True, both went up in the 1970s, and both came down later. But 
note that inflation started declining in the early 1980s, whereas nominal money growth 
remained high for another decade and came down only in the 1990s. Average inflation 
from 1981 to 1990 was down to 4%, while average money growth over the same period 
was still running at 7.5%.
Second, even the relation between the money supply and the interest rate in the short 
run also turned out to be unreliable. This made money growth an unreliable instrument 
to affect demand and output.
Both problems—the poor relation between money growth and inflation in the 
medium run, and the poor relation of the interest rate to the money supply in the short 
run—had the same origin: shifts in the demand for money. An example will help here. 
Suppose, as a result of the introduction of credit cards, people decide to hold only half the 
amount of money they held before; in other words, the real demand for money decreases 
by half. In the short run, at a given price level, this large decrease in the demand for 
money will lead to a large decrease in the interest rate. In other words, we will see a large 
decrease in the interest rate with no change in the money supply. (In terms of Figure 4–2 
in Chapter 4, money demand will shift to the left, leading to a decrease in the equilibrium 
interest rate.) In the medium run, at a given interest rate, the price level will adjust and 
the real money stock will eventually decrease by half. For a given nominal money stock, 
the price level will eventually double. So, even if the nominal money stock remains con-
stant, there will still be a period of inflation as the price level doubles. During this period, 
0
2
4
6
8
10
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
Percent per year
Inflation
M1 Growth
Figure 23-1
M1 Growth and 
Inflation: 10-Year 
Averages, 1970 to 2007
There is no tight relation 
between M1 growth and 
inflation, even in the medium 
run.
Source: FRED: CPIAUSL, M1SL


=== PAGE 315 ===
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
489
there will be no tight relation between nominal money growth (which is zero) and infla-
tion (which would be positive).
Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, these frequent and large shifts in money demand 
created serious problems. Central banks found themselves torn between trying to keep a 
stable target for money growth and staying within announced bands (to maintain cred-
ibility), or adjusting to shifts in money demand (to stabilize the interest rate and output in 
the short run and inflation in the medium run). Starting in the early 1990s, a dramatic 
rethinking of monetary policy took place based on targeting inflation rather than money 
growth and the use of an interest rate rule to achieve it. Let’s look at it more closely.
Inflation Targeting
If one of the main goals of the central bank is to achieve low and stable inflation, why 
not target inflation directly rather than money growth? And if the way to affect activity 
in the short run is to rely on the effect of the interest rate on spending, why not focus 
directly on the interest rate rather than on money growth? This is the reasoning that led 
to the elaboration of inflation targeting. Central banks committed to achieving a target 
inflation rate, and decided to use the interest rate as the instrument to achieve it. Let’s 
look at both parts of the strategy.
Committing to a given inflation target in the medium run is hardly controver-
sial. Trying to achieve a given inflation target in the short run would appear to be 
much more controversial. Focusing exclusively on inflation would seem to eliminate 
any role for monetary policy in reducing output fluctuations. But in fact this is not 
the case.
To see why, return to the Phillips curve relation between inflation, pt, expected infla-
tion, pe
t, and the deviation of the unemployment rate, ut, from the natural rate of unem-
ployment, un (equation (8.10)):
pt = pe
t - a1ut - un2
Let the inflation target be p. Assume that, thanks to the central bank’s reputation, 
this target is credible, so that people expect inflation to be equal to the target. The relation 
becomes:
pt =
 pQ - a1ut - un2
Note that, if the central bank can hit its inflation target exactly, so pt = pQ , unem-
ployment will be equal to its natural rate. By targeting and achieving a constant rate of 
inflation in line with inflation expectations, the central bank also keeps unemployment 
at the natural rate, and by implication keeps output at potential.
Put strongly: Even if policymakers did not care about inflation per se (they do) but 
cared only about output, inflation targeting would still make sense. Keeping inflation 
stable is a way to keep unemployment at the natural rate, or equivalently to keep output 
at potential. This result has been dubbed the divine coincidence. With a Phillips curve 
of the form given in equation (8.10), there is no conflict between keeping inflation con-
stant and keeping output at potential. A focus on keeping stable inflation is thus the right 
approach to monetary policy, in both the short and medium run.
This result is a useful benchmark, but it is too strong. Life is not that nice. The main 
objection is that, as we saw in Chapter 8, the Phillips curve relation is far from an exact 
relation. Rather than try to achieve the target inflation rate each period, at the risk of 
large fluctuations in unemployment, it is better to try to achieve it only over time. So 
most central banks adopted what is called flexible inflation targeting: When inflation 
is away from target, rather than trying to return it to target right away, they adjust the 
interest rate to return to the target inflation rate over time.
b 0 = -a1ut - un2 1
ut = un.


=== PAGE 316 ===
490 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
The Interest Rate Rule
Inflation is not under the direct control of the central bank. The policy rate is. Thus, the 
question is how to set the policy rate to achieve the target rate of inflation. The answer is 
a simple one: When inflation is higher than the target, increase the policy rate to decrease 
demand and the pressure on prices; when it is below the target rate of inflation, decrease 
the policy rate. With this in mind, in the 1990s, John Taylor, at Stanford University, sug-
gested the following rule for the policy rate, a rule now known as the Taylor rule:
 
■
Let pt be the rate of inflation and pQ  be the target rate of inflation.
 
■
Let it be the policy rate, that is, the nominal interest rate controlled by the central 
bank, and i be the target nominal interest rate—the nominal interest rate associated 
with the neutral rate of interest, rn, and the target rate of inflation, pQ , so i = rn + pQ .
 
■
Let ut be the unemployment rate and un be the natural unemployment rate.
Think of the central bank as choosing the nominal interest rate, i. (Recall, from 
Chapter 4, that, through open market operations, and ignoring the liquidity trap, the 
central bank can achieve any short-term nominal interest rate that it wants.) Then, 
Taylor argued, the central bank should use the following rule:
it = i + a1pt - pQ 2 - b1ut - un2
where a and b are positive coefficients chosen by the central bank.
Let’s look at what the rule says:
 
■
If inflation is equal to target inflation 1pt = pQ 2 and the unemployment rate is equal 
to the natural rate of unemployment 1ut = un2, then the central bank should set the 
nominal interest rate, it, equal to its target value, i. This way, the economy can stay 
on the same path, with inflation equal to the target inflation rate and unemploy-
ment equal to the natural rate of unemployment.
 
■
If inflation is higher than the target 1pt 7 pQ 2, the central bank should increase the 
nominal interest rate, it, above i. This higher interest rate will lead to an increase in 
unemployment, and this increase in unemployment will lead to a decrease in infla-
tion. The coefficient a should therefore reflect how much the central bank cares 
about inflation. The higher a, the more the central bank will increase the interest 
rate in response to inflation, the more the economy will slow down, the more unem-
ployment will increase, and the faster inflation will return to the target inflation rate.
 
■
In any case, as Taylor pointed out, a should be larger than one. Why? Because what 
matters for spending is the real interest rate, not the nominal interest rate. When 
inflation increases, the central bank, if it wants to decrease spending and output, 
must increase the real interest rate. In other words, it must increase the nominal 
interest rate more than one-for-one with inflation.
 
■
If unemployment is higher than the natural rate of unemployment 1ut 7 un2, the 
central bank should decrease the nominal interest rate. The lower nominal interest 
rate will lead to an increase in output, leading to a decrease in unemployment. The 
coefficient b should reflect how much the central bank cares about unemployment. 
The higher b, the more the central bank will be willing to deviate from target infla-
tion to keep unemployment close to the natural rate of unemployment.
In stating this rule, Taylor did not argue that it should be followed blindly. Many 
other events, such as an exchange rate crisis or the need to change the composition of 
spending on goods, and thus the mix between monetary policy and fiscal policy, justify 
changing the nominal interest rate for reasons other than those included in the rule. But, 
he argued, the rule provided a useful way of thinking about monetary policy. Once the 
central bank has chosen a target rate of inflation, it should try to achieve it by adjusting 
For a refresher, go back to 
Chapter 9, Section 9-1.
c
Some economists argue that 
the increase in US inflation 
in the 1970s was due to the 
fact that the Fed increased 
the nominal interest rate less 
than one-for-one with infla-
tion. The result, they argue, 
was that an increase in infla-
tion led to a decrease in the 
real interest rate, which led to 
higher demand, lower unem-
ployment, more inflation, a 
further decrease in the real 
interest rate, and so on.
c


=== PAGE 317 ===
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
491
the nominal interest rate. The rule it should follow should consider not only current 
inflation but also current unemployment.
The logic of the rule was convincing, and, by the mid-2000s, most central banks in 
advanced economies had adopted some form of flexible inflation targeting, that is, the 
choice of an inflation target together with the use of an interest rule.
Then the crisis came and raised many questions, about the choice of the inflation 
target, what to do when the interest rate suggested by the interest rule reaches the zero 
lower bound, and whether and how the central bank should worry about financial stabil-
ity in addition to inflation and output. The next section discusses the choice of the infla-
tion target, and the following sections discuss other questions raised by the crisis.
23-3 THE OPTIMAL INFLATION RATE
Table 23-1 shows that inflation steadily decreased in advanced economies from the early 
1980s on. In 1981, average inflation in the OECD was 10.5%; in 2018, it was down 
to 2.3%. In 1981, only two countries (out of the 24 OECD members at the time) had an 
inflation rate below 5%; in 2018, the number had increased to 35 out of 36.
Before the crisis, most central banks aimed for an inflation rate of about 2%. Was 
this the right goal? The answer depends on the costs and benefits of inflation.
The Costs of Inflation
We saw in Chapter 22 that very high inflation, say a rate of 30% per month or more, 
can disrupt economic activity. The debate in advanced economies today, however, is not 
about the costs of inflation rates of 30% or more per month. Rather, it centers on the 
advantages of, say, 0% versus 4% inflation per year. Within that range, economists iden-
tify four main costs of inflation: (1) shoe-leather costs, (2) tax distortions, (3) money illu-
sion, and (4) inflation variability.
Shoe-Leather Costs
Recall from Chapter 9 that, in the medium run, a higher inflation rate leads to a higher 
nominal interest rate and so a higher opportunity cost of holding money. As a result, peo-
ple decrease their money balances by making more trips to the bank—thus the expres-
sion shoe-leather costs. These trips would be avoided if inflation were lower and people 
could be doing other things instead, such as working more or enjoying leisure.
During hyperinflations, shoe-leather costs become quite large. But their importance 
in times of moderate inflation is limited, at best. If an inflation rate of 4% leads people to 
go to the bank, say, one more time every month, or to do one more transaction between 
their money market fund and their checking account each month, this hardly qualifies 
as a major cost of inflation.
The country with inflation 
above 5% is Turkey (15%).
b
Table 23-1 Inflation Rates in the OECD, 1981–2018
Year
1981
1990
2000
2010
2018
OECD average*
10.5%
6.2%
2.8%
1.2%
2.3%
Number of countries with 
inflation below 5%**
2/24
15/24
24/27
27/30
35/36
*Average of GDP deflator inflation rates, using relative GDPs measured at PPP prices as weights.
**The second number denotes the number of member countries at the time.


=== PAGE 318 ===
492 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
Tax Distortions
The second cost of inflation comes from the interaction between the tax system and 
inflation.
Consider, for example, the taxation of capital gains. Taxes on capital gains are typi-
cally based on the change in the price in dollars of the asset between the time it was pur-
chased and the time it is sold. This implies that the higher the rate of inflation, the higher 
the tax. An example will make this clear:
 
■
Suppose inflation has been running at p% a year for the last 10 years.
 
■
Suppose also that you bought your house for $100,000 10 years ago, and you are 
selling it today for $100,000 times 11 + p%210; so its real value is unchanged.
 
■
If the capital gains tax is 30%, the effective tax rate on the sale of your house—defined 
as the ratio of the tax you pay to the price for which you sell your house—is
130%2 100,000 11 + p%210 - 100,000
100,000 11 + p%210
 
■
Because you are selling your house for the same real price at which you bought it, 
your real capital gain is zero, so you should not pay any tax. Indeed, if p = 0—there 
has been no inflation—then the effective tax rate is 0. But if, for example, p = 4%, 
then the effective tax rate is 9.7%: Despite the fact that your real capital gain is zero, 
you end up paying a high tax.
The problems created by the interactions between taxation and inflation extend 
beyond capital gains taxes. Although we know that the real rate of return on an asset 
is the real interest rate, not the nominal interest rate, income for the purpose of income 
taxation includes nominal interest payments, not real interest payments. Or to take yet 
another example, until the early 1980s in the United States, the income levels correspond-
ing to different income tax rates were not increased automatically with inflation. As a 
result, people were pushed into higher tax brackets as their nominal income—but not nec-
essarily their real income—increased over time, an effect known as bracket creep.
You might argue that this cost is not a cost of inflation per se but rather the result 
of a badly designed tax system. In the house example we just discussed, the government 
could eliminate the problem if it indexed the purchase price to the price level—that is, it 
adjusted the purchase price for inflation since the time of purchase—and computed the 
tax on the difference between the sale price and the adjusted purchase price. Under this 
computation, there would be no capital gains and therefore no capital gains tax to pay. 
But because tax codes around the world rarely define the tax base in real terms, the infla-
tion rate matters and leads to distortions.
Money Illusion
The third cost comes from money illusion—the notion that people appear to make 
systematic mistakes in assessing nominal versus real changes in incomes and interest 
rates. A number of computations that would be simple when prices are stable become 
more complicated when there is inflation. When people compare their income this year 
to their income in previous years, they must keep track of the history of inflation. When 
choosing between different assets or deciding how much to consume or save, they must 
keep track of the difference between the real interest rate and the nominal interest rate. 
Casual evidence suggests that many people find these computations difficult and often 
fail to make the relevant distinctions. Economists and psychologists have gathered more 
formal evidence, and it suggests that inflation often leads people and firms to make incor-
rect decisions (see the Focus Box “Money Illusion”). If this is the case, then a seemingly 
simple solution is to have zero inflation.
The numerator of the fraction 
equals the sale price minus 
the purchase price. The 
denominator is the sale price.
c
Some economists argue that 
the costs of bracket creep 
were much larger. As tax 
revenues steadily increased, 
there was little pressure on 
the government to control 
spending. The result, they 
argue, was an increase in the 
overall size of the govern-
ment in the 1960s and 1970s 
far beyond what would have 
been desirable.
c


=== PAGE 319 ===
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
493
Inflation Variability
Yet another cost comes from the fact that higher inflation is typically associated with 
more variable inflation. And more variable inflation means that financial assets such as 
bonds, which promise fixed nominal payments in the future, become riskier.
Take a bond that pays $1,000 in 10 years. With constant inflation over the next 10 
years, not only the nominal value but also the real value of the bond in 10 years is known 
with certainty—we can compute exactly how much a dollar will be worth in 10 years. 
But with variable inflation, the real value of $1,000 in 10 years becomes uncertain. The 
more variability there is, the more uncertainty it creates. Saving for retirement becomes 
more difficult. For those who have invested in bonds, lower inflation than they expected 
means a better retirement; but higher inflation may mean poverty. This is one of the rea-
sons retirees, for whom part of their income is fixed in dollar terms, typically worry more 
about inflation than other groups in the population.
You might argue, as in the case of taxes, that these costs are not due to inflation per 
se but rather to the financial markets’ inability to provide assets that protect their holders 
against inflation. Rather than issuing only nominal bonds (which promise a fixed nomi-
nal amount in the future), governments or firms could also issue indexed bonds—bonds 
that promise a nominal amount adjusted for inflation so people do not have to worry 
about the real value of the bond when they retire. Indeed, as we saw in Chapter 14, 
A good, and sad, movie 
about surviving on a fixed 
pension in post–World War II 
Italy: Umberto D, by Vittorio 
de Sica (1952).
b
Money Illusion
There is a lot of anecdotal evidence that many people fail to 
properly adjust for inflation in their financial computations. 
Recently, economists and psychologists have started look-
ing at money illusion more closely. In a recent study, two 
psychologists, Eldar Shafir at Princeton and Amos Tversky 
at Stanford, and one economist, Peter Diamond at MIT, 
designed a survey aimed at finding out how prevalent money 
illusion is and what causes it. Among the many questions 
they asked of people in various groups (people at Newark 
International Airport, people at two New Jersey shopping 
malls, and a group of Princeton undergraduates) is the 
following:
Suppose Adam, Barbara, and Carlos each received an 
inheritance of $200,000 and each used it immediately to 
purchase a house. Suppose each sold the house one year after 
buying it. Economic conditions were, however, different in 
each case:
 
■
During the time Adam owned the house, there was a 
25% deflation—the prices of all goods and services 
decreased by approximately 25%. A year after he 
bought the house, he sold it for $154,000 (23% less 
than what he had paid).
 
■
During the time Barbara owned the house, there 
was no inflation or deflation—the prices of  all 
goods and services did not change significantly 
 during the year. A year after she bought the house, 
she sold it for $198,000 (1% less than what he had 
paid).
 
■
During the time Carlos owned the house, there was 
a 25% inflation—the prices of all goods and services 
increased by approximately 25%. A year after Carlos 
bought the house, he sold it for $246,000 (23% more 
than what he had paid).
Please rank Adam, Barbara, and Carlos in terms of the 
success of their house transactions. Assign “1” to the person 
who made the best deal and “3” to the person who made the 
worst deal.
In nominal terms, Carlos clearly made the best deal, fol-
lowed by Barbara, followed by Adam. But what is relevant 
is how they did in real terms, adjusting for inflation. In real 
terms, the ranking is reversed. Adam, with a 2% real gain, 
made the best deal, followed by Barbara (with a 1% loss), fol-
lowed by Carlos (with a 2% loss).
The survey’s answers are shown below.
Rank
Adam
Barbara
Carlos
1st
37%
15%
48%
2nd
10%
74%
16%
3rd
53%
11%
36%
Carlos was ranked first by 48% of the respondents, and 
Adam was ranked third by 53% of the respondents. These 
answers suggest that money illusion is prevalent. In other 
words, people (even Princeton undergraduates) have a hard 
time adjusting for inflation.1
FOCUS
1Source: Eldar Shafir, Peter Diamond, and Amos Tversky, “Money Illusion,” in D. Kahneman and A. Tversky, eds., Choices, 
Values, and Frames (New York: Cambridge University Press & Russell Sage Foundation, 2000).


=== PAGE 320 ===
494 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
several countries, including the United States, have introduced such bonds so people can 
better protect themselves against movements in inflation.
The Benefits of Inflation
This may surprise you, but inflation is not all bad. There are three benefits of inflation: 
(1) seignorage, (2) (somewhat paradoxically) the use of the interaction between money 
illusion and inflation in facilitating real wage adjustments, and (3) the option of negative 
real interest rates for macroeconomic policy.
Seignorage
Money creation—the ultimate source of inflation—is one of the ways the government 
can finance its spending. Put another way, money creation is an alternative to borrowing 
from the public or raising taxes.
As we saw in Chapter 22, the government typically does not “create” money 
to pay for its spending. Rather, the government issues and sells bonds and spends the 
proceeds. But if the bonds are bought by the central bank, which then creates money to 
pay for them, the result is the same. Other things being equal, the revenues from money 
creation—that is, seignorage—allow the government to borrow less from the public or to 
lower taxes.
How large is seignorage in practice? During hyperinflations, seignorage often 
becomes an important source of government finance. But its importance in OECD econo-
mies today, and for the range of inflation rates we are considering, is much more limited. 
Take the case of the United States. The ratio of the non-interest-paying money issued by 
the Fed to GDP is around 6%. An increase in the rate of nominal money growth of 4% 
per year (which eventually leads to a 4% increase in the inflation rate) would lead there-
fore to an increase in seignorage of 4% * 6%, or 0.24% of GDP. This is a small amount 
of revenue in exchange for 4% higher inflation.
Therefore, while the seignorage argument is sometimes relevant (for example, in 
economies that do not have a good tax collection system), it hardly seems relevant 
in the discussion of whether OECD countries today should have, say, 0% versus 4% 
inflation.
Money Illusion Revisited
Paradoxically, the presence of money illusion provides at least one argument for having 
a positive inflation rate.
To see why, consider two situations: In the first, inflation is 4% and your wage goes 
up by 1% in nominal terms—in dollars. In the second, inflation is 0% and your wage goes 
down by 3% in nominal terms. Both lead to the same 3% decrease in your real wage, so 
you should be indifferent. The evidence, however, shows that many people will accept the 
real wage cut more readily in the first case than in the second case.
Why is this example relevant to our discussion? As we saw in Chapter 13, the con-
stant process of change that characterizes modern economies means some workers must 
sometimes take a real pay cut. Thus, the argument goes, the presence of inflation allows 
for these downward real wage adjustments more easily than if inflation is equal to zero. 
The evidence on the distribution of wage changes in Portugal under high and low infla-
tion in Chapter 8 suggests that this is indeed a relevant argument.
The Option Of Negative Real Interest Rates
Higher inflation decreases the probability of hitting the zero lower bound. This argu-
ment, which may be the most important, follows from our discussion of the zero lower 
bound in Chapter 4. A numerical example will help here.
Recall equation (22.6): Let H 
denote the monetary base—
the money issued by the 
central bank. Then
Seignorage
Y
= ∆H
PY = ∆H
H  H
PY
where ∆H>H is the rate of 
growth of the monetary 
base, and H>PY is the ratio 
of the monetary base to 
nominal GDP.
c
Note that I say “non–interest-
paying money.” This is 
because one of the changes 
triggered by the crisis is that 
many central banks now 
issue both non-interest-
paying money and interest-
paying money. More on this 
in Section 23-4. Given that 
interest-paying money bal-
ances pay an interest rate 
similar to that on bonds, they 
are like bonds and do not 
yield seignorage revenue.
c
A conflict of metaphors: 
Because inflation makes 
these real wage adjustments 
easier to achieve, some econ-
omists say inflation “greases 
the wheels” of the economy. 
Others, emphasizing the 
adverse effects of inflation on 
relative prices, say that infla-
tion “puts sand” in the work-
ings of the economy.
c


=== PAGE 321 ===
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
495
 
■
Consider two economies, both with a natural real interest rate equal to 2%.
 
■
In the first economy, the central bank maintains an average inflation rate of 4%, so 
the nominal interest rate is on average equal to 2% + 4% = 6%.
 
■
In the second economy, the central bank maintains an average inflation rate of 0%, 
so the nominal interest rate is on average equal to 2% + 0% = 2%.
 
■
Suppose both economies are hit by a similar adverse shock, which leads, at 
a given interest rate, to a decrease in spending and a decrease in output in the 
short run.
 
■
In the first economy, the central bank can decrease the nominal interest rate 
from 6% to 0% before it hits the liquidity trap, thus achieving a decrease of 6%. 
Under the assumption that expected inflation does not change immediately and 
remains equal to 4%, the real interest rate decreases from 2% to -4%.This is 
likely to have a strong positive effect on spending and help the economy recover.
 
■
In the second economy, the central bank can decrease the nominal interest rate only 
from 2% to 0%, a decrease of 2%. Under the assumption that expected inflation does 
not change right away and remains equal to 0%, the real interest rate decreases only 
by 2%, from 2% to 0%. This small decrease in the real interest rate may not increase 
spending by very much.
In short, an economy with a higher average inflation rate has more room to use 
monetary policy to fight a recession. An economy with a low average inflation rate may 
find itself unable to use monetary policy to return output to the natural level of output. 
As we saw in Chapter 6, this possibility is far from being just theoretical. At the start 
of the crisis, central banks quickly hit the zero lower bound, unable to decrease inter-
est rates further. With this experience in mind, the question is whether this should lead 
central banks to choose higher average inflation in the future. Some economists argue 
that the Great Recession was an exceptional event, that it is unlikely that countries will 
face a liquidity trap again in the future, and so there is no need to adopt a higher average 
inflation rate. Others, and this includes me, argue that the problems faced by a country 
in a liquidity trap are so serious that we should avoid taking the risk that it happens 
again, and that a higher target rate of inflation is in fact justified. What is undisputed, 
though, is that permanently low inflation reduces the central bank’s ability to affect the 
real interest rate.
The Optimal Inflation Rate: The State of the Debate
At this stage, most central banks in advanced economies have an inflation target of 
about 2%. But they are being challenged on two fronts: Some economists want to achieve 
price stability—that is, 0% inflation. Others want, instead, a higher target rate of infla-
tion, say 4%.
Those who want to aim for 0% make the point that 0% is a different target rate from 
all others; it corresponds to price stability. This is desirable in itself. Knowing that the 
price level will be roughly the same in 10 or 20 years as it is today simplifies a number of 
complicated decisions and eliminates the scope for money illusion. Also, given the time 
consistency problem facing central banks (discussed in Chapter 21), the credibility and 
simplicity of the target inflation rate are important. Some economists and some central 
bankers believe price stability—that is, a 0% target—can achieve these goals better than 
a target inflation rate of 2%. So far, however, no central bank has actually adopted a 0% 
inflation target.
Those who want to aim for a higher rate argue that it is essential not to fall in the 
liquidity trap in the future, and that, for these purposes, a higher target rate of inflation, 
say 4%, would be helpful. They argue that the choice of a 2% target was based on the 


=== PAGE 322 ===
496 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
belief that countries would be unlikely to hit the zero lower bound, and that this belief 
has proven false. Their argument has gained little support among central bankers, who 
argue that if central banks increase their target from its current value of 2% to 4%, peo-
ple may start anticipating that the target will soon become 5%, then 6%, and so on, and 
inflation expectations will no longer be anchored. Thus, they see it as essential to keep 
current target levels.
The debate goes on. For the time being, most central banks continue to aim for low 
but positive inflation—that is, inflation rates of about 2%.
23-4 UNCONVENTIONAL MONETARY 
POLICY
When, at the start of the crisis, the interest rate reached the zero lower bound, central 
banks were unable to decrease it further and thus lost the use of conventional mon-
etary policy. In this book, I have assumed until now that monetary policy became impo-
tent. But this was a simplification. Central banks explored other ways to affect activity, a 
set of measures known as unconventional monetary policy.
The idea was simple. While the policy rate was equal to zero, other interest rates 
remained positive, reflecting various risk premiums. Although I introduced a risk pre-
mium in Chapter 6 in the relation of the borrowing rate to the policy rate, I did not discuss 
in detail what it depended on and how it could be affected by monetary policy. In fact, we 
can think of the premium on an asset as determined by supply and demand for the asset. 
If the demand for an asset decreases, whether because buyers become more risk averse 
or because some investors just decide not to hold the asset, the premium will increase. 
If, instead, the demand increases, the premium will decrease. This is true whether the 
increased demand comes from private investors or from the central bank.
This is the logic that led central banks to buy assets (other than short-term bonds) 
with the intention of decreasing the premium on them and thus decreasing the corre-
sponding borrowing rates with the aim of stimulating economic activity. They did this 
by financing their purchases through money creation, leading to a large increase in the 
money supply. Although the increase in the money supply had no effect on the policy 
rate, the purchase of these other assets decreased their premium, leading to lower bor-
rowing rates and higher spending. These purchase programs are known as quantitative 
easing, or credit easing, policies.
In the United States, the Fed started its first quantitative easing program in November 
2008, even before it had reached the zero lower bound. In what has become known as 
Quantitative Easing 1 (QE1 for short), the Fed started buying certain types of mortgage-
based securities. We saw the reason for it in Chapter 6: One of the triggers of the cri-
sis was the difficulty of assessing the value of the underlying mortgages on which those 
securities were based; as a result, many investors had decided to stop holding any kind 
of mortgage-based security, and the premium even on securities that seemed relatively 
safe had jumped to very high levels. By buying these securities, the Fed decreased their 
premium and limited the effect on the financial system and on spending. The second 
quantitative easing program, known as QE2, started in November 2010, when the Fed 
starting buying longer-term Treasury bonds, with the intent of decreasing the term pre-
mium on these long-term bonds. The third quantitative easing program, QE3, started in 
September 2012, with the further purchase of mortgage-based securities, to decrease 
the cost of mortgages and further help the housing market to recover.
Much research has gone into assessing the effectiveness of quantitative easing 
in reducing risk premia. There is wide agreement that QE1 made a large difference. 
This reasoning, which applies 
to many other issues, is 
called the “slippery slope” 
argument.
c


=== PAGE 323 ===
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
497
By intervening in a market that had become dysfunctional, the Fed limited the increase in 
premiums. The effects of QE2 and QE3, in which the Fed intervened in markets that were 
no longer dysfunctional, are more controversial. It is widely accepted that they decreased 
the term premium on long-term government bonds. The question is by how much.
The general assessment of quantitative easing policies, in the United States and 
elsewhere, is that they had some effect on borrowing rates, and thus monetary policy 
can still have some effect on activity even at the zero lower bound. But there is also wide 
agreement that they work in more complicated and less reliable ways than conventional 
monetary policy. Put another way, the zero lower bound may not make monetary policy 
impotent, but it surely limits its efficiency.
We have looked at what the Fed bought. How did it finance itself? By issuing money. 
As the interest rate was (nearly) equal to zero, banks were indifferent between holding 
bonds or holding money. So they were willing to accumulate central bank money in the 
form of reserves at the Fed. (Actually the Fed was willing to pay a slightly positive inter-
est rate, 0.25%, which made it attractive for banks to hold reserves.) As a result, the 
monetary base, i.e., the money issued by the central bank increased from $850 billion, 
or about 6.6% of GDP in September 2008, to $4,000 billion, or about 22% of GDP in 
2015. This evolution is represented by the red line in Figure 23-2. The blue line shows 
the reserves held by banks; most of the increase was reflected in an increase in bank 
reserves at the Fed. As a result, the balance sheet of the Fed is much larger than it was 
before the crisis.
Monetary Policy since the End of the Liquidity Trap
When the Fed decided at the end of 2015 that the economy was stronger and it should 
increase the federal funds rate again, it faced an obvious problem. If it continued to pay 
zero interest on reserves (or, more precisely, to pay a very low one), banks would not be 
willing to hold reserves. They would try to sell all of them in the federal funds market, 
and, unless the Fed was willing to buy back all of them—and by implication, to sell all the 
bonds it had accumulated as a result of QE—the federal funds rate would go back to zero. 
If the Fed did not want this to happen, it had to start paying interest on reserves. And this 
is what it did, and still does today.
The Fed now operates a corridor system. It sets two rates: the rate on reserves, the 
rate at which banks can in effect lend to the Fed; and the discount rate, the rate at which 
banks can borrow from the Fed. The federal funds rate is still determined in the federal 
funds market, but it must be in the corridor created by the two rates. To see why, suppose 
The Fed did not want to sell 
all the assets it had acquired 
during the crisis right away. 
It thought, rightly, that this 
would lead to large disrup-
tions in the asset markets, 
and selling should happen 
slowly over time, if at all.
b
0.000
0.500
1.000
1.500
2.000
2.500
3.000
3.500
4.000
4.500
Trillions of dollars
Reserves at the Fed
Monetary base
2005-01
2005-09
2006-05
2007-01
2007-09
2008-05
2009-01
2009-09
2010-05
2011-01
2011-09
2012-05
2013-01
2013-09
2014-05
2015-01
2015-09
2016-05
2017-01
2017-09
2018-05
2019-01
Figure 23-2
The Evolution of the US 
Monetary Base from 
2005 to 2018
As a result of quantita-
tive easing, the monetary 
base more than quadrupled 
between 2005 and 2015.
Source: FRED: RESBALS 
BOGMBASE


=== PAGE 324 ===
498 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
that the federal funds rate was lower than the rate on reserves: No bank would be willing to 
lend to another bank, as lending to the Fed would give a higher rate. Suppose instead that 
the federal funds rate was higher than the discount rate: no bank would want to borrow 
from another bank, as borrowing from the Fed would give a lower rate. Thus, while the 
federal funds rate is still determined in the federal funds market, it can vary only within the 
corridor created by the two rates. The evolution of the three rates is shown in Figure 23-3, 
and it shows how the federal funds rate has moved with the interest rate paid on reserves.
To summarize: Monetary policy is in flux. The crisis forced central bankers in general, 
and the Fed in particular, to question the focus on inflation targeting and to explore tools 
other than the policy rate. As a result of the use of unconventional policies during the zero 
lower bound period, central banks’ balance sheets are much larger than they used to be. They 
hold a much larger quantity of assets than before the crisis and have much larger liabilities. 
They pay interest on a large part of their liabilities, the reserves held by banks at the central 
bank. The main policy tool has become the interest rate paid to banks on their reserves at the 
Fed. The main choice facing central banks at this point is whether to keep their large balance 
sheets, or to return to a situation closer to the precrisis situation, with a small balance sheet 
and mostly non–interest-paying liabilities. While they have in most cases either stabilized or 
started to decrease their balance sheets, the endpoint has not been decided yet.
23-5 MONETARY POLICY AND FINANCIAL 
STABILITY
When the financial crisis started, central banks were confronted not only with a major 
decline in demand but also with serious problems in the financial system. As we saw in 
Chapter 6, the decline in housing prices had been the trigger for the crisis, which was 
then amplified by failures of the financial system. Opacity of assets led to doubts about 
the solvency of financial institutions, and these doubts led to runs, in which investors 
tried to get their funds back, forcing fire sales and generating further doubts about sol-
vency. The first urgent issue facing the central banks was thus what measures to take—
beyond the measures already described in the previous sections. The second issue was 
whether and how, in the future, monetary policy should try to decrease the probability of 
another such financial crisis. We look at both issues in turn.
Contrary to the argument in 
the text, you can see that 
the federal funds rate has 
remained slightly below the 
interest rate on reserves! This 
is because of a technical 
issue: Some financial institu-
tions do not have access to 
Fed reserves and are willing 
to lend at a lower rate than 
the rate on reserves. The 
general message remains: 
The floor on the federal funds 
rate is mostly determined by 
the rate on reserves.
c
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
Interest rate on reserves
Federal funds rate
Discount rate
2015-01
2015-04
2015-07
2015-10
2016-01
2016-04
2016-07
2016-10
2017-01
2017-04
2017-07
2017-10
2018-01
2018-04
2018-07
2018-10
2019-01
Figure 23-3
The Interest Rate on 
Reserves, the Federal 
Funds Rate, and the 
Discount Rate since 
2015
The federal funds rate has 
moved in line with the inter-
est rate on reserves.
Source: FRED: IOER, FEDFUNDS, 
INTDSRUSM193N


=== PAGE 325 ===
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
499
Liquidity Provision and Lender of Last Resort
Central banks have long known about bank runs. As we saw in Chapter 6, the structure 
of the balance sheet of banks exposes them to runs. Many of their assets, such as loans, 
are illiquid. Many of their liabilities, such as demand deposits, are liquid; as the term indi-
cates, demand deposits can be withdrawn on demand. Thus, depositors’ worries, founded 
or unfounded, can lead them to want to withdraw their funds, forcing the bank either to 
close or to sell the assets at fire sale prices. In most countries, two measures have tradi-
tionally been taken to limit such runs:
 
■
Deposit insurance, which gives investors the confidence that they will get their 
funds back even if the bank is insolvent, so that they do not have an incentive to 
run.
 
■
And, in case the run actually happens, the provision of liquidity by the central bank 
to the bank against some collateral, namely some of the assets of the bank. This way, 
the bank can get the liquidity it needs to pay the depositors without having to sell the 
assets. This function of the central bank is known as lender of last resort, and it 
has been one of the functions of the Fed since its creation in 1913.
What the crisis showed, however, was that banks were not the only financial institu-
tions that could be subject to runs. Any institution whose assets are less liquid than its 
liabilities is exposed to similar risks of a run. If investors want their funds back, it may be 
difficult for the financial institution to get the liquidity it needs. Given the urgency during 
the crisis, the Fed extended liquidity provision to some financial institutions other than 
banks. It had little choice other than to do so, but, looking forward, the question is what 
the rules should be—which institutions can expect to receive liquidity from the central 
bank and which cannot. The question is far from settled. Do central banks really want to 
provide such liquidity to institutions they do not regulate?
Macroprudential Tools
Starting in the mid-2000s, the Fed became worried about the increase in housing 
prices. But the Fed and other central banks facing similar housing price increases were 
reluctant to intervene. This was for a number of reasons: First, they found it difficult to 
assess whether the price increases reflected increases in fundamentals (e.g., low interest 
rates) or a bubble (i.e., increases in prices above what were justified by fundamentals). 
Second, they worried that an increase in the interest rate, although it might indeed 
stop the increase in housing prices, would also slow the whole economy and trigger a 
recession. Third, they thought that, even if the increase in housing prices was indeed a 
bubble, and the bubble were to burst and lead to a decrease in housing prices later, they 
could counter the adverse effects on demand through an appropriate decrease in the 
interest rate.
The crisis has forced them to reconsider. As we saw, housing price declines combined 
with the buildup of risk in the financial system led to a major financial and macroeco-
nomic crisis, which they could neither avoid nor counter.
As a result, a broad consensus is emerging along two lines:
 
■
It is risky to wait. Even if there is doubt about whether an increase in asset prices 
reflects fundamentals or a bubble, it may be better to do something than nothing. 
Better to stand for a while in the way of a fundamental increase and turn out to be 
wrong than to let a bubble build up and burst, with major adverse macroeconomic 
effects. The same applies to buildups of financial risk; for example, excessive bank 
leverage. Better to prevent high leverage, even at the risk of decreasing bank credit, 
than to allow it to build up, increasing the risk of a financial crisis.
This has led to the dictum: 
Better lean [against increases 
in asset prices] than clean 
[up after asset prices have 
crashed].
b


=== PAGE 326 ===
500 
Back to Policy 
Extensions
 
■
To deal with bubbles, credit booms, or dangerous behavior in the financial sys-
tem, the interest rate is not, however, the right policy instrument. It is too blunt a 
tool, affecting the whole economy rather than resolving the problem at hand. The 
right instruments are macroprudential tools, rules that are aimed directly at 
borrowers, or lenders, or banks and other financial institutions, as the case may 
require.
What form might some of the macroprudential tools take? Some tools may be aimed 
at borrowers:
 
■
Suppose the central bank is worried about what it perceives to be an excessive increase 
in housing prices. It can tighten conditions under which borrowers can obtain mort-
gages. A measure used in many countries is a ceiling on the size of the loan bor-
rowers can take relative to the value of the house they buy, a measure known as the 
maximum loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, or maximum LTV for short. Reducing the 
maximum LTV is likely to decrease demand and thus slow down the price increase. 
(The Focus Box “LTV Ratios and Housing Price Increases from 2000 to 2007” exam-
ines the relation between maximum LTVs and housing price increases in the period 
leading up to the crisis.)
 
■
Suppose the central bank is worried that people are borrowing too much in for-
eign currency. An example will help to make the point. In the early 2010s, more 
than two-thirds of mortgages in Hungary were denominated in Swiss francs! 
The reason was simple. Swiss interest rates were very low, making it apparently 
attractive for Hungarians to borrow at the Swiss rather than the Hungarian 
interest rate. The risk that borrowers did not consider, however, was that the 
Hungarian currency, the forint, would depreciate vis-à-vis the Swiss franc. Such 
a depreciation took place, increasing, on average, the real value of the mortgages 
Hungarians had to pay by more than 50%. Many households could no longer 
make their mortgage payments. This suggests that it would have been wise to put 
restrictions from the start on the amount of borrowing in foreign currency by 
households.
Some tools may be aimed at lenders, such as banks or foreign investors:
 
■
Suppose the central bank is worried about an increase in bank leverage. We saw in 
Chapter 6 why this should be a concern. High leverage was one of the main reasons 
why housing price declines led to the financial crisis. The central bank can impose 
minimum capital ratios to limit leverage. These may take various forms (for example, 
a minimum value for the ratio of capital to all assets, or a minimum value for the 
ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets, with riskier assets having a higher weight). In 
fact, in a series of agreements known as Basel II and Basel III, many countries have 
agreed to impose the same minimums on their banks. A more difficult and unre-
solved issue is whether and how such capital ratios should be adjusted over time as a 
function of economic and financial conditions (whether, for example, they should be 
increased if there appears to be excessive credit growth).
 
■
Suppose the central bank is worried about high capital inflows, as, for example, in 
the Hungarian case we just discussed. The central bank worries that, although inves-
tors are willing to lend at low interest rates to the country, they may change their 
mind, and this might lead to a sudden stop. The central bank may then want to limit 
the capital inflows by imposing capital controls on inflows. These may take the 
form of taxes on different types of inflows, with lower taxes on capital flows that are 
less prone to sudden stops, such as foreign direct investment (the purchase of 
physical assets by foreigners), or a direct limit on the ability of domestic residents to 
take out foreign loans.
This led the Hungarian 
government to allow for a 
conversion of mortgages in 
Swiss francs to mortgages in 
forints at a better exchange 
rate. Hungarian households 
were better off, but the banks 
that loaned to them were 
worse off.
c
Go back to Chapter 6 for 
a refresher on the relation 
between leverage and capital 
ratios.
c
See the Focus Box “Sudden 
Stops, Safe Havens, and the 
Limits to the Interest Parity 
Condition” in Chapter 19. c


=== PAGE 327 ===
LTV Ratios and Housing Price Increases 
from 2000 to 2007
Is it the case that countries that had more stringent restric-
tions on borrowing had lower housing price increases from 
2000 to 2007? An answer is given in Figure 1. The figure, 
taken from an IMF study, shows the evidence for 21 coun-
tries for which the data could be obtained.
The horizontal axis plots the maximum loan-to-value 
(LTV) ratio on new mortgages across countries. This max-
imum is not necessarily a legal maximum but may be a 
guideline, or a limit over which additional requirements, 
such as mortgage insurance, may be asked of  the bor-
rower. A ratio of  100% means that a borrower may be able 
to get a loan equal to the value of  the house. Actual val-
ues vary from 60% in Korea; to 100% in many countries, 
including the United States; to 125% in the Netherlands. 
The vertical axis plots the increase in the nominal price 
of  housing from 2000 to 2007 (measuring the real price 
increase would lead to a similar picture). The figure also 
plots the regression line, the line that best fits the set of 
observations.
The figure suggests two conclusions:
The first is that there indeed appears to be a positive rela-
tion between the LTV ratio and the housing price increase. 
Korea and Hong Kong, which both imposed low LTV ratios, 
had smaller housing price increases. Spain and the United 
Kingdom, with much higher ratios, had much larger price 
increases.
The second is that the relation is far from tight. This 
should not come as a surprise, as surely many other factors 
played a role in the increase in housing prices. But even con-
trolling for other factors, it is difficult to identify with much 
confidence the precise effect of the LTV ratio. Looking for-
ward, we shall have to learn a lot more about how an LTV-
based regulatory tool might work before it can be used as a 
reliable macroprudential tool.2
FOCUS
Australia 
Belgium
Canada              
Denmark             
Finland
France
Germany
Hong Kong
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Maximum LTV allowed
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland         
United Kingdom      
United States
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
240
220
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
y 5 1.3x 2 46.7
Nominal house price increase from 2000 to 2007
(percent)
Figure 1
Maximum LTV Ratios and Housing Price Increases, 2000–2007
Although there is wide agreement that the use of such macroprudential tools is desir-
able, many questions remain:
 
■
In many cases, we do not know how well these tools work (e.g., how much a decrease 
in the maximum LTV ratio affects the demand for housing, or whether foreign inves-
tors can find ways of avoiding capital controls).
2Source: Christopher Crowe, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Deniz Igan, and Pau Rabanal, “Policies for Macrofinancial Stability: 
Options to Deal with Real Estate Booms,” Staff Discussion Note, International Monetary Fund, February 2011.
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
501


=== PAGE 328 ===
 
■
There are likely to be complex interactions between the traditional monetary pol-
icy tools and these macroprudential tools. For example, there is some evidence 
that very low interest rates lead to excessive risk taking, whether by investors or by 
financial institutions. If this is the case, a central bank that decides, for macroeco-
nomic reasons, to lower the interest rate may have to use various macroprudential 
tools to offset the potential increase in risk taking. Again, we know little about how 
best to do it.
 
■
The question arises of whether macroprudential tools, together with traditional 
monetary policy tools, should be under the control of the central bank or of a 
separate authority. The argument for having the central bank in charge of both 
monetary and macroprudential tools is that these tools interact, and thus only 
one centralized authority can use them in the right way. The argument against it 
is that such a consolidation of tools may give too much power to an independent 
central bank.
At this stage, some countries have taken one route and others have taken another. 
In the United Kingdom, the central bank has been given power over both monetary 
and macroprudential tools. In the United States, the responsibility has been given to 
a council under the formal authority of the US Treasury, but with the Fed playing a 
major role within the council.
To summarize: The crisis has shown that macroeconomic stability requires the use 
not only of traditional monetary instruments but also of macroprudential tools. How 
best to use them is one of the challenges facing macroeconomic policymakers today.
SUMMARY
 
■Until the 1980s, the design of monetary policy focused 
on nominal money growth. But because of the poor rela-
tion between inflation and nominal money growth, this 
approach was abandoned by most central banks.
 
■Central banks now focus on an inflation rate target rather 
than a nominal money growth rate target. And they think 
about monetary policy in terms of choosing the nomi-
nal interest rate rather than choosing the rate of nominal 
money growth.
 
■The Taylor rule gives a useful way of thinking about the 
choice of the nominal interest rate. The rule states that 
the central bank should move its interest rate in response 
to two main factors: the deviation of the inflation rate 
from the target rate of inflation, and the deviation of 
the unemployment rate from the natural rate of unem-
ployment. A central bank that follows this rule will sta-
bilize activity and achieve its target inflation rate in the 
medium run.
 
■The optimal rate of inflation depends on the costs and ben-
efits of inflation. Higher inflation leads to more distortions, 
especially when it interacts with the tax system. On the 
other hand, because higher inflation implies higher average 
nominal interest rates, it decreases the probability of hitting 
the zero lower bound, a bound that was costly in the recent 
crisis.
 
■When advanced economies hit the zero lower bound dur-
ing the Great Financial Crisis, central banks explored 
unconventional monetary policy tools, such as quantita-
tive easing. These policies worked through the effects of 
central bank purchases on the risk premiums associated 
with different assets. These purchases led to large increases 
in the balance sheets of central banks. The issue is now 
whether the central banks should reduce those balance 
sheets, and whether unconventional measures should be 
used in normal times.
 
■The crisis has shown that stable inflation is not a sufficient 
condition for macroeconomic stability. This is leading cen-
tral banks to explore the use of macroprudential tools. These 
tools can, in principle, help limit bubbles, control credit 
growth, and decrease risk in the financial system. How best 
to use them, however, is still poorly understood and is one 
the challenges facing monetary policy today.
502 
Back to Policy 
Extensions


=== PAGE 329 ===
KEY TERMS
inflation targeting, 485
interest rate rule, 485
Great Moderation, 485
M1, 487
divine coincidence, 489
flexible inflation targeting, 489
Taylor rule, 490
shoe-leather costs, 491
bracket creep, 492
money illusion, 492
conventional monetary policy, 496
unconventional monetary policy, 496
quantitative easing, 496
credit easing, 496
QE1, 496
QE2, 496
QE3, 496
corridor system, 497
lender of last resort, 499
macroprudential tools, 500
loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, 500
Basel II, 500
Basel III, 500
capital controls, 500
foreign direct investment, 500
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using the information in this chapter, label each of the following 
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. The most important argument in favor of a positive rate of 
inflation in OECD countries is seignorage.
b. Fighting inflation should be the Fed’s only purpose.
c. Inflation and money growth moved together from 1970 to 
2009.
d. Because most people have little trouble distinguishing 
between nominal and real values, inflation does not distort 
decision making.
e. Most central banks around the world have an inflation tar-
get of 4%.
f. The higher the inflation rate, the higher the effective tax 
rate on capital gains.
g. The Taylor rule describes how central banks adjust the pol-
icy interest rate across recessions and booms.
h. The zero lower bound on the nominal policy rate was 
expected to be a regular feature of monetary policy when 
inflation targeting began.
i. The Federal Reserve pays interest on reserves held by mem-
ber banks.
j. Quantitative easing refers to central bank purchases of 
assets with the intention of directly affecting the yield on 
these assets.
k. In the crisis, central banks provided liquidity to financial 
institutions they did not regulate.
l. One consequence of the crisis was higher capital require-
ments and a more extensive regulatory regime for banks.
2. Breaking the link between money growth and inflation in the 
medium run
The money demand relationship in Chapter 4 is used implicitly 
in Figure 23-1. That relation is
M
P = Y  L1i2
The central bank in conjunction with the political authorities 
chooses an inflation target p *.
a. Derive the target nominal interest rate in a medium-run 
equilibrium.
b. Consider medium-run equilibria where potential output 
does not grow. Derive the relation between money growth 
and inflation. Explain.
c. Now consider medium-run equilibria where potential out-
put grows at 3% per year. Now derive the relation between 
money growth and inflation. Do you expect inflation to be 
higher or lower than money growth? Explain.
d. Consider Figure 23-1. Look first at the period ending in 
roughly 1995. How do your results in parts b and c relate 
to it?
e. Focus on the case where all money is currency. We can 
then think of money demand as being the demand for cur-
rency (you can refer back to the appendix to Chapter 4 if 
needed). Over the past 50 years:
i. Automatic tellers have allowed cash to be dispensed 
outside of regular banking hours.
ii. The use of credit cards for purchases has greatly expanded.
iii. The use of debit cards for purchases has greatly expanded.
iv. Most recently, technology has allowed for small pur-
chases by credit and debit cards by waving the card 
over a payment terminal near the cash register.
How would each of these innovations affect the demand 
for currency?
f. The FRED database at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
has an annual series for currency (CURRVALALL). Download 
this series and the annual series for nominal GDP (GDPA). 
Construct a ratio of currency to nominal GDP. How does this 
series behave from 1993 to 2018? Are you surprised?
3. The inflation target: Nearly every major central bank has chosen 
an inflation target of 2%.
a. Why might a central bank choose a lower inflation target, 
for example, zero inflation?
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
503


=== PAGE 330 ===
b. Why might a central bank choose a higher inflation target, 
for example, 4% inflation?
4. Indexed bonds and inflation uncertainty
In Chapter 14, in the Focus Box titled “The Vocabulary of 
Bond Markets,” the concept of an inflation-indexed bond was 
introduced. Although such bonds are typically long in maturity, the 
example that follows compares a standard one-year Treasury bill 
with an inflation-indexed one-year Treasury bill.
a. A standard one-year $100 Treasury bill promises to 
pay $100 in one year and sells for $PB (notation is from 
Chapter 4) today. What is the nominal interest rate on the 
Treasury bill?
b. Suppose that the price level is P today and P1t+12 next year 
and the bill sells for $PB today. What is the real interest rate 
on the Treasury bill?
c. An indexed Treasury bill pays a larger payment next 
year to compensate for inflation between the date of 
issue and the date of payment. If the bill is issued today 
when the price index is 100, what will be the payment 
next year if the price index has risen to 110? What is the 
real interest rate on an indexed Treasury bill that sells 
for $PB today?
d. If you are an investor, will you want to hold indexed or 
non-indexed bonds?
5. Unwinding unconventional monetary policy
It was noted in the text that the Federal Reserve purchased, in 
addition to Treasury bills, large amounts of mortgage-backed secu-
rities and long-term government bonds as part of quantitative eas-
ing. Figure 23-2 shows that in 2015, there were about $4 trillion 
of assets in the monetary base. By 2018, total assets fell to $3.5 
trillion. The table below presents some further detail on three types 
of Federal Reserve assets in billions of dollars.
Asset category
End of 2015
End of 2017
Treasury securities less than 
one year to maturity
 216.1
 443.7
Treasury securities with more 
than one year to maturity
2245.4
2010.5
Mortgage-backed securities
1747.5
1764.9
Source: Annual Reports of the Federal Reserve Board, Table 2, Federal 
Reserve Bank holdings of US Treasury and federal agency securities
a. Why did the Federal Reserve Board buy the mortgage-
backed securities?
b. Why did the Federal Reserve Board buy the long-term 
Treasury bonds?
c. What would you predict as the consequences of the follow-
ing operation by the Federal Reserve Board: selling $0.5 
trillion in mortgage-backed securities and buying $0.5 
trillion in Treasury securities with less than one year to 
maturity?
d. What would you predict as the consequences of the fol-
lowing operation by the Federal Reserve Board: selling 
$0.5 trillion in Treasury securities with maturity longer 
than one year and buying $0.5 trillion in Treasury securi-
ties with less than one year to maturity?
e. How did the Fed rearrange its balance sheet between 2015 
and 2017? Is there evidence of unwinding of quantitative 
easing?
6. The maximum loan-to-value ratio
Most home-buyers purchase their home with a combination 
of a cash down payment and a mortgage. The loan-to-value ratio is 
a rule that establishes the maximum mortgage loan allowed on a 
home purchase.
a. If a home costs $300,000 and the maximum loan-to-
value ratio is 80% as in Denmark, what is the minimum 
down payment?
b. If the maximum loan-to-value is reduced, how will this 
affect the demand for homes?
c. In Chapter 14 you were referred to The Economist House 
Price Index. Find that index and look at the behavior of 
house prices in Canada and the United States from 1970 
to the latest date available. On December 10, 2015, the 
Canadian Minister of Finance announced an increase in 
the minimum down payment on any portion of a mort-
gage more than $500,000. (The announcement can be 
found at www.fin.gc.ca/n15/15-088-eng.asp.) Why was 
this action taken? Do you see an effect on house prices in 
Canada? What do you conclude?
7. Bank behavior in the interest rate corridor
The United States (unlike other countries) has two types of 
bank-like financial institutions. Member banks can borrow from 
the Federal Reserve at the discount rate and must keep currency in 
their vaults or deposits at the Federal Reserve earning the deposit 
rate as reserves. These rates are shown in Figure 22-3. Non-
member banks can hold their reserves as currency or deposits at 
member banks. The federal funds rate is the interest rate on one-
day loans in financial markets. It is determined by the demand for 
and the supply of  these funds by both member and non-member 
banks. Chapter 4 introduced both reserve requirements and bal-
ance sheets.
a. If the reserve ratio is 10% and a member bank that can 
place funds on deposit at the Federal Reserve has the bal-
ance sheet below, does this bank have excess reserves? 
If the deposit rate is 0.5% and the federal funds rate 
is 0.4%, what is the profit-maximizing choice for the 
overnight placement of excess reserves for the member 
bank?
Bank
Assets
Liablities
Currency 60
Deposits at Fed 50
Loans 600
Bonds 290
Checkable  
deposits 1000
504 
Back to Policy 
Extensions


=== PAGE 331 ===
b. If the reserve ratio is 10% and a member bank that can 
place funds on deposit at the Federal Reserve has the bal-
ance sheet below, does this bank have excess reserves? If 
the discount rate is 0.75% and the federal funds rate is 
0.8%, how should the profit-maximizing member bank 
borrow overnight to meet reserve requirements?
Banks
Assets
Liablities
Currency 30
Deposits at Fed 50
Loans 600
Bonds 320
Checkable 
deposits 1000
c. If all banks in America were member banks, explain why 
the Federal Reserve could be certain that the federal funds 
rate fell between the deposit rate and the discount rate?
d. In Figure 22-3, the federal funds rate falls slightly below the 
deposit rate. Explain, using the balance sheet below for a 
non-member bank, how this would happen. Non-member 
banks hold part of their required reserves as deposits at 
member banks.
Non-member bank
Assets
Liablities
Currency 50
Deposits at  
member bank 20
Loans 330
Bonds 100
Checkable 
deposits 500
DIG DEEPER
8. Taxes, inflation, and home ownership
In this chapter, we discussed the effect of inflation on the 
effective capital-gains tax rate on the sale of a home. In this ques-
tion, we explore the effect of inflation on another feature of the tax 
code—the deductibility of mortgage interest.
Suppose you have a mortgage of $50,000. Expected inflation 
is pe, and the nominal interest rate on your mortgage is i. Consider 
two cases:
i. pe = 0%; i = 4%
ii. pe = 10%; i = 14%
a. What is the real interest rate you are paying on your mort-
gage in each case?
b. Suppose you can deduct nominal mortgage interest pay-
ments from your income before paying income tax. Assume 
that the tax rate is 25%. So, for each dollar you pay in 
mortgage interest, you pay 25 cents less in taxes, in effect 
getting a subsidy from the government for your mortgage 
costs. Compute, in each case, the real interest rate you are 
paying on your mortgage, taking this subsidy into account.
c. Considering only the deductibility of mortgage inter-
est (and not capital-gains taxation), is inflation good for 
homeowners
9. Suppose you have been elected to Congress. One day, one of your 
colleagues makes the following statement:
The Fed chair is the most powerful economic policy maker in 
the United States. We should not turn over the keys to the 
economy to someone who was not elected and therefore has no 
accountability. Congress should impose an explicit Taylor rule 
on the Fed. Congress should choose not only the target infla-
tion rate but the relative weight on the inflation and unem-
ployment targets. Why should the preferences of an individual 
substitute for the will of the people, as expressed through the 
democratic and legislative processes?
Do you agree with your colleague? Discuss the advantages 
and disadvantages of imposing an explicit Taylor rule on the 
Fed.
EXPLORE FURTHER
10. The frequency of the zero lower bound around the world
Use the FRED database at the Federal Reserve Bank of  
St. Louis to find the monthly average nominal policy interest rates for 
four major central banks. The series for these rates are: United States, 
federal funds (FEDFUNDS); United Kingdom, (INTDSRGBM193N); 
European Central Bank (covering the Euro-zone countries including Italy, 
France, and Germany), immediate rate on Euro (IRSTCI01EZM156N); 
Bank of Japan, immediate rate on yen (IRSTCI01JPM156N); Bank of 
Canada, immediate rate (IRSTCB01CAM156N).
Which of these central banks has spent a significant 
period of time at the zero lower bound since 2000?
11. Current monetary policy
Problem 10 in Chapter 4 asked you to consider the current 
stance of monetary policy. Here, you are asked to do so again, but 
with the additional understanding of monetary policy you have 
gained in this and previous chapters.
Go to the Web site of  the Federal Reserve Board of  Governors 
(www.federalreserve.gov) and download either the press release 
you considered in Chapter 4 (if  you did Problem 10) or the 
most recent press release of  the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC).
a. What is the stance of monetary policy as described in the 
press release?
b. Is there evidence that the FOMC considers both inflation 
and unemployment when setting interest rate policy as 
would be implied by the Taylor rule?
c. Does the language make specific reference to a target for 
inflation?
d. Does the language make specific reference to the natural or 
target real rate of interest?
e. Does the language raise any issues related to macropru-
dential regulation of financial institutions?
 
Chapter 23 
Monetary Policy: A Summing Up  
505


=== PAGE 332 ===
FURTHER READINGS
 
■For an early statement of inflation targeting, read 
“Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary 
Policy?” by Ben Bernanke and Frederic Mishkin, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 1997, Vol. 11 (Spring): pp. 97–116. 
(This article was written by Ben Bernanke before he became 
Chairman of the Fed.)
 
■For more institutional details on how the Fed actually func-
tions, see www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/default.
htm.
 
■A time frame giving financial developments and the actions 
of the Fed from 2008 to 2011 is given at www.nytimes.com/
interactive/2008/09/27/business/economy/20080927_
WEEKS_TIMELINE.html.
 
■A great long read: The description of the problems in the 
financial sector and of US monetary policy during the crisis 
by the Fed Chair himself, in The Courage to Act: A Memoir of 
a Crisis and Its Aftermath by Ben Bernanke, W. W. Norton & 
Co., Inc., 2015.
506 
Back to Policy 
Extensions

